The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Residuary Legatee, by F. J.
Stimson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Residuary Legatee
       Or, The Posthumous Jest of the Late John Austin

Author: F. J. Stimson

Release Date: March 8, 2022 [eBook #67592]

Language: English

Produced by: D A Alexander, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by
             University of California libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RESIDUARY LEGATEE ***





The Residuary Legatee




  WORKS OF FICTION

  BY
  F. J. STIMSON
  (_J. S. of Dale_)


  THE SENTIMENTAL CALENDAR,                           $2.00
    By the Major
    The Bells of Avalon
    Mr. Pillian Wraye
    The Seven Lights of Asia
    A First Love Letter
    Bill Shelby
    Two Passions and a Cardinal Virtue
    Gloriana: a Fairy Story
    In a Garret
    Our Consul at Carlsruhe
    A Tale Unfolded
    Mrs. Knollys
    Passages from the Diary of a Hong Kong Merchant

  THE CRIME OF HENRY VANE,                     CLOTH, $1.00

  GUERNDALE,                  CLOTH, $1.25; PAPER, 50 CENTS

  THE RESIDUARY LEGATEE,      CLOTH, $1.00; PAPER, 35 CENTS




  THE RESIDUARY LEGATEE

  _Or, The Posthumous Jest of the
  late John Austin_

  BY

  F. J. STIMSON

  (J. S. OF DALE)

  NEW YORK

  CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
  1888




  COPYRIGHT, 1887, 1888, BY

  CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS


  TROW’S
  PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY,
  NEW YORK.




CONTENTS.


  _SCENE FIRST--THE WILL._

                                                   PAGE

    I. ULYSSES AND PENELOPE,                          3

   II. THE PAVILION BY THE LILIES,                   14

  III. PAUL AND VIRGINIA,                            24


  _SCENE SECOND--THE CODICIL._

    I. AN IROQUOIS IN TROUVILLE,                     37

   II. THESEUS AND ARIADNE,                          45

  III. DIDO AND ÆNEAS,                               56


  _SCENE THIRD--THE ADMINISTRATION._

    I. THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS,                        67

   II. A LEAD OF HEARTS,                             72

  III. PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDA,                        82


  _SCENE FOURTH--THE FINAL ACCOUNTS._

    I. ÆNEAS AND CAMILLA,                            93

   II. THE IDYL OF ANTEROS,                         102

  III. THE UNCERTAIN GLORY OF A NEW YORK GIRL,      109

   IV. THE KEEPING OF THE TRYST,                    115

    V. THE RETURN OF THE COUNTESS,                  121


  _SCENE FIFTH--THE RESIDUARY BEQUEST._

    I. THE ORDER OF DISCHARGE,                      129

   II. A PRIOR MORTGAGE,                            133

  III. THE POSTHUMOUS JEST,                         137




Scene First

THE WILL




I.

ULYSSES AND PENELOPE.


On the morning of August 14th, in this last summer, Mr. Austin May
alighted at the little Cypress Street station of the Boston & Albany
Railroad, and, accompanied only by a swarthy and adroit valet, and a
very handsome St. Bernard dog, got into the somewhat antiquated family
“carryall” which awaited him, and drove away. May was a stranger to
the man in charge of the station, as well as to the wide-awake trio
of boys who made it a sort of club, their exchange of gossip, and
pleasure resort; and thus his arrival was unnoticed and unrecorded,
though his last absence had extended over a period of several years.
It was a most oppressive day; and what few human beings were dressed
and stirring made haste to get beneath the dense foliage, or to plunge
into the numerous private-paths and shortcuts, with which the suburb
of Brookline is provided; leaving the roads and their dust undisturbed,
except by the sedate progress of the old carryall, which left behind
it, suspended in the air, an amazing quantity of the same considering
its speed, and quite obscured the morning sun with its golden cloud.
Austin May might have been an entering circus procession, and no one
would have found it out. Even the boys at the station were sluggish,
and indisposed to “catch on” behind every train, much less to give
their particular attention to one undistinguished stranger, with or
without a dog.

May lit a cigar, and the carryall and its occupants lumbered along
unheeded. The road was walled in and roofed over by a dense canopy of
foliage borne by arching American elms; and through its green walls,
dense as a lane in Jersey, only momentary glimpses were to be had
of shaven lawns and quiet country-houses. When they came to a gate,
with high stone posts, topped by an ancient pair of cannon-balls, the
carryall turned slowly in. A moment after they had passed the screen
of border foliage, May found himself in the midst of a wide lawn and
garden, open to the sunlight, but rimmed upon all points of the compass
by a distant hedge of trees, so that no roads, houses, thoroughfares,
or other fields, were visible. In the centre of this stood, with much
dignity, an elderly brick house, its southern wall quite green with
ivy. In front of it was a large pavilion, some hundred yards removed,
low and stone-built, rising without apparent purpose from the side of
an artificial pool of water, rimmed with rich bands of lilies. May
looked anxiously for the pavilion, and, when he saw it, sank back in
his seat with a sigh of relief.

The carryall stopped before a broad, white marble step at the
front door; and the Charon of the conveyance, known locally as the
“dépôt-man,” having dumped the one leather trunk upon the step, stood
looking at the stranger contemplatively, as if his own duties in this
world were all fulfilled.

“How much?” said May.

“Twenty-five cents,” said the dépôt-man.

May pulled out a half-dollar. “No matter about the change,” he added,
as the dépôt-man hitched up his vest, preparatory to fishing in his
cavernous trousers for the requisite quarter.

The dépôt-man changed his quid of tobacco, and drove off without a
word, the downward lines from the corners of his mouth a shade deeper,
as if he profited unwillingly by such unnecessary prodigality, which
aroused rather contempt than gratitude. May waited until the carryall
had quite disappeared in the elm-trees, and then rang the bell.
Apparently, he expected no prompt answer; for he sat down upon one of
the old china garden-seats, which flanked the door, and rolled and lit
a cigarette. After a few minutes he rang again, louder; the unwonted
tinkle reverberated through the closed house, and an imaginative man,
putting his ear to the key-hole, might have heard the scuffle of the
family ghosts as they scurried back to their hiding-places. At last an
uncertain step was heard in the hall, and after much turning of keys
and rattling of chains, the door was slowly opened by an old woman,
who blinked at the flood of sudden light which poured in, rebounded,
eddied, and at last filled each corner of the fine old hall.

“Mrs. Eastman, I suppose?”

“That’s my name,” said the woman, in a strong down-east accent.

“I am Mr. May,” said he.

The woman glared at him as before, and did not compromise her dignity
by a courtesy. “Mr. Eastman got your letter,” said she, “and I have got
your room ready. Will you go there now? I don’t know who’s to carry up
your trunk.”

May’s valet solved that difficulty by shouldering the leather
receptacle and carrying it up himself. The room was large, airy,
and neatly kept. A straw matting was on the floor, covered here
and there with well-worn rugs; and from about the windows came a
twittering of birds. All in it indicated, not a new and modern house,
but the well-worn nest of a family that had been born, had cried,
laughed, played, made love, and died, in every room. Yet there was no
evidence of recent occupation; the room was innocent of those last
touches which are the pride of the feminine housekeeper; curtains,
splashers, anti-macassars, were few; and no twilled, frilled, or
pleated things infested the windows, and impeded the entry of the
outer air. May opened the door of a large closet; it was empty, save
for a broad, white, chip hat of prehistoric fashion, and ribbons of
faded rose-color; but, if it had belonged to a daughter of the house,
it was evident that its owner was either dead or married, and her
womanly activity was exercised in other locuses and focuses. No other
manifestation of what Goethe (impatiently) calls the “eternal woman”
was present; and May’s expression almost approached to a smile as he
opened the door of the spacious bath-room, and noted the naked mantels
and marble slabs, unencumbered by china dogs, translated vases, and
other traps for the unwary. On the shelf was a noble pile of rough and
manly towels, and as he turned the faucet, he found that the water
was copious and cold. From all this you may infer that Mr. Austin May
was a bachelor. I have committed myself to no such statement as yet,
and May himself would have been the first to term your curiosity--at
the present stage of your acquaintance with him--an impertinence.
As he turned away from the bath-room the smile of satisfaction died
away upon his lips. Mrs. Eastman was still standing at the door, the
incarnation of the custodian, in iron-gray rigidity of dress, and
equilateral triangularity of white _fichu_.

“Everything seems to be all right, Mrs. Eastman,” said he, graciously.
(Behold how simple are the needs of man--give them but fresh water,
space, and peace, and their desires are filled; while womankind--are
otherwise.)

“Everything _is_ all right,” broke in Mrs. Eastman, like the offended
Vestal deity, at a statement implying contrary possibilities. Then
again she congealed.

May looked at her more closely, with a slight shade of annoyance. How
was he to get rid of this woman?

“You must have had a sadly lonely life here, Mrs. Eastman,” said he, by
way of placation. And lo! the flood-gates were loosened and the tide
poured forth. Who ever could have suspected Mrs. Eastman of gregarious
instinct? As well have fancied her loquacious. As Moses’s wand upon the
rock of Horeb, so an adroit phrase addressed to womankind.

“I have not complained, Mr. May; and nobody can say that I haven’t
done by you as if it were my own house that I was living in, and the
water-back out of order all the time, and the pipes freezing all the
winter; and Mr. Eastman, says he, we must have a furnace fire, and I
say no, it ain’t of enough account for us two old people, and so we
sit by the kitchen stove, and my sister, Mrs. Tarbox, with her four
children and the scarlet fever, over at Roxbury, and nobody to provide
for ’em, for John Tarbox--says I to Cynthia when he come up to Augusta
from the Provinces (I come from Augusta, Maine, Mr. May), he ain’t but
a shiftless fellow, you mark my words, says I; and says she, you let me
alone, Miranda, and I’ll do as much by you, s’ she; an’ so it turned
out, an’ many’s the time I’ve said to Mr. Eastman, Mr. Eastman, I must
go an’ see Cynthia, s’s I, for there she is on her back, with her hands
full of children, an’ no one to do for ’em but just John Tarbox; an’
s’s he, Miranda, it would be tempting Providence for you to go with
your rheumatism, an’ s’s I, I can’t help that, Mr. Eastman (he’s a
member o’ the church, Mr. Eastman), I guess Providence ain’t got no
more to say about it than my horse-chestnuts in my dress pocket, an’
I always wear flannel next my skin; an’ s’s I, I’d go, come what may,
but for Mr. May’s silver, s’s I (I keep it under my bed, Mr. May, and
have slept upon it every mortal night since I took this house), an’ I
know I saw a moth in the best parlor last week, an’ the furniture not
beaten since April; an’ so six weeks gone since I saw my sister; an’
since there’s a foreigner in the kitchen, s’ I to Mr. Eastman, Mr.
Eastman----”

“My dear Mrs. Eastman,” interposed May, gently, “I had no idea you
thought it necessary to stick so close to the house. Now I beg that
you will go at once. My servant will get all I want for dinner. You
and Mr. Eastman must both go, and don’t think of coming back before
to-morrow--haven’t you any other visits to pay?”

Mrs. Eastman, who had started at the “my dear Mrs. Eastman” as if May
had offered to kiss her, admitted, ungraciously, that her husband’s
sister lived in Jamaica Plain. But the foreign valet was, evidently,
still in her mind; and, after sundry prognostications as to the
domestic evils to result from “that man’s” presence in the kitchen,
she finally removed herself, with some precipitation, only when May, in
desperation, began to take off his coat. Left to himself, May resumed
his coat, drew a chair to the window, sighed, and lit a cigarette. Mrs.
Eastman’s disappearance was followed by a distant shriek; and shortly
afterward there was a slight scratching at the door. May opened it,
and the St. Bernard dog walked gravely in and stretched himself by the
chair; a certain humorous expression about his square jowl indicating
that he had been the cause of the shriek in question. It was a bad
quarter of an hour for Mrs. Eastman’s nerves. Fides was the dog’s name,
and his master patted his head approvingly.

May sat down again, and his eye roamed over the stretch of green turf,
a view broken above by the huge arms of button-wood, and canopies of
English elm. Shortly afterward he saw the valet emerge from a side
entrance, and step hastily across the lawn into the shade of a great
hemlock, where he stood, gesticulating wildly. A minute or two later
Mrs. Eastman, in an Indian shawl and purple bonnet, appeared in
progress down the carriage-road, limply accompanied by her lord and
master. When she disappeared, with her husband and a red and roomy
carpet-bag, behind the avenue of elms, the sinuous oriental emerged
from the hemlock, and shook his fist. Silence supervened. The prospect
of peace emboldened May to light a large cigar. The valet returned to
the house, and no sound was audible but the chirping of the birds, the
rustle of leaves, and the dignified and heavy breathing of the hound of
St. Bernard.




II.

THE PAVILION BY THE LILIES.


As May was knocking off the last white ash from his cabaña, his servant
knocked softly, entered, and bowed. Rising, May, followed by the St.
Bernard, descended and entered the dining-room. Upon the walls were
six pictures, four of which were portraits of persons, and two of
indigestible fruit. The persons seemed to have been eating the fruit.
The portraits were all Copleys, and comprised, first, a gentleman in a
red coat and a bag-wig; second, a young lady with a sallow complexion
and a lilac satin dress cut so low that only a profusion of lace
concealed her deficiencies of figure; third, an elderly scholar with
long transparent fingers and sinister expression; fourth, a nice old
lady with a benignant grin. The eyes of the old lady beamed amiably
down upon the table, where lay a snowy cloth and a glorious breakfast,
consisting of a fish, a bird, a peach, and a pint of claret. The genius
who had wrought this miracle disappeared, and May was left undisturbed.

The fish had gone the way of all flesh, and the bird had gone the way
of the fish, and the first glass of Léoville was awaiting translation
to the sky of human reveries, when there was a sound of carriage-wheels
upon the gravel. May started. The glass of claret crashed untasted to
the floor, and its owner sprang upon his feet and fled precipitately.
Just as the door-bell rang, he escaped from the garden door of the hall
and plunged into a maze of shrubbery; with a hurried sign to the silent
servant as he passed. Rapidly and circuitously, he circled back behind
the hedges until a successful flank movement brought him to the main
driveway at the point where he remembered Mrs. Eastman had disappeared;
here, by a bold dash he secured the front lawn; and a few cautious
steps brought him to the side-door of the large, low stone pavilion
aforementioned. Drawing a brass key from his pocket, he managed to
turn a grating lock and entered. The door closed behind him and was
carefully bolted on the inside. The interior was quite dark; but May
cautiously felt his way to one of the front windows, and opening the
sash, turned the slats of the blind to a horizontal position. Through
this he peered, breathless with his run. At the front door of the
house was the same carryall that had brought him from the station; but
its occupants were not visible. May saw the St. Bernard dog silently
threading his way through the bushes, his nose upon the trail; a minute
later, and he scratched upon the door of the pavilion.

“Hush,” hissed May, angrily.

The dog scratched, softly. With an impatient imprecation, May opened
it; the dog had a bit of paper in his mouth. May snatched it eagerly.

“_Madame d’Arrebocques_” was written upon it, in the hand of Schmidt,
his valet. “_Elle doit attendre._”

Madame d’Arrebocques? May knew no such person. Madame d’Arrebocques?
Why should she write? Why had she not sent her card? Had Schmidt
spelled the name right? Ah! at last he had it, thanks to Mrs. Eastman’s
garrulity. This could be no other than Cynthia Tarbox, the ill-married
sister of Miranda, his châtelaine. And ill-mannered fortune! they
had missed each other on the way. Mrs. Eastman might return at any
moment. As he pondered, the carryall moved slowly off; but as it
passed the window, he noted that it contained no other figure than the
station-master. The woman, then, was left behind.

May tore out a card and wrote upon it, in German, _Sie muss fort!_
and handed it to Fides, the dog, who trotted silently off. What means
Schmidt used, May never knew; but some ten minutes later, four children
came screaming down the avenue, running and gasping for breath,
followed by a thin and wiry woman, robed in a flapping whitey-brown
duster, whose haste and streaming bonnet-ribbons bore every evidence of
extreme mental perturbation.

Shortly afterward Schmidt himself appeared, in his hands a glass and
another bottle of the same claret. By a refinement of delicacy, the
glass was full. “_Monsieur n’a pas fini son dejeúner_,” said he; and
May took the glass with trembling fingers, but put it down untasted.

“Schmidt,” said he, in French, “it is nearly midday. You must bring
everything here. I dare not go back to the house.”

The valet evinced no surprise, but nodded and disappeared. Left to
himself, May opened the shutters of several of the windows and looked
out. The side of the pavilion that was farthest from the house rose
directly out of the broad pond or ornamental lake already referred to.
This was to the west; the northern was screened by a dense growth of
pines, the southern contained the entrance door before mentioned, and
the eastern façade commanded the house, which was some two hundred
yards distant across the avenue. May looked out across the water,
which was an ornamental piece fringed with reeds and water-flowers.
In the centre of the little lake rose a low round island, which had a
comfortable rustic seat and a soft and grassy surface. May pressed a
small knob in the wall near the window, and coming back from it, took a
heavy book from one of the dwarf bookcases that lined the large room.
The book was a quarto edition of Burton’s “Anatomy of Melancholy;” and
immediately afterward the adjoining section of bookcase swung slowly
forward from the wall, revealing a descending passageway. Through this
May disappeared, and the bookcase swung itself back into place.

Some minutes later, Schmidt entered, after several knocks, with a
large japanned tray. Upon this tray was a small paper of bromide
of potassium, two boxes of cigars, strong and mild, a carafe of
cognac, seltzer, a large opera-glass, a powerful dark-lantern, and a
six-barrelled silver-mounted revolver. Fides lay on a mat on the floor;
but his master was nowhere visible in the room. Schmidt set the tray
upon the table and looked about him. Being alone, it must be confessed
that his cosmopolitan face showed traces of surprise.

The whole interior of the pavilion obviously contained but one room;
and in that room Austin May was nowhere to be seen. In the centre
was a huge long centre-table of carven oak; it was covered with dust,
and upon it was but one large book--Burton’s “Anatomy of Melancholy.”
All the four walls were lined with filled bookcases, and, above them
were serried ranks of engravings, etchings, drawings, but nothing that
was not in black and white. Most of these had woman for a subject,
but woman always either in her least agreeable or most unspiritual
aspect--Katherines with Petruchio, Madame de Staels, Harriet
Martineaus, Manon Lescauts, Cressidas, and Marneffes; Messalinas,
Hecubas, Danaës, Judiths, daughters of Herodias; an engraving of the
Appalachian Women’s Rights Association, and a charcoal sketch of
Daudet’s _Sappho_. And of such as were not real persons or historical
characters, there was but one common characteristic, namely, that
all were shamelessly naked of body and unspiritual of face. The sole
exception to this rule stood at the farther end of the room from
Schmidt; it was a full-sized and marvellously perfect reproduction of
the Venus of Milo; having the cynical inscription upon its pedestal,
“A woman without rights.”

Schmidt gave a long low whistle, as he went about the room to examine
these engravings; then he returned to the centre-table, wholly at a
loss. May surely had not left the pavilion; but where was he? He looked
out of the windows, and saw only the pine-grove, the house, the lawn,
and the lake. In the centre of the lake was a large fountain, plashing
merrily, and shaped like the coronal of some huge lily. As he was
watching this, the fountain suddenly stopped; the water-petals wavered
and fell, revealing a small grass island that had been screened by the
circlet of playing water. A moment after, he started at his master’s
voice; May was immediately behind him, calmly putting a book back in
the bookcase. It was the Burton’s “Anatomy.”

“You may go now, Schmidt; I shall not want you until to-morrow. You
will stay in the under part of the house; and not go out under any
circumstances, unless you hear a pistol-shot. When you hear my pistol
fired you will come out rapidly. If fired twice, you will run to the
stable for a horse. If I want you to do anything, I will send Fides
with a note.”

Schmidt bowed his comprehension and was about to withdraw.

“Stop,” said May, “there is one thing more. You must go to Brookline
village and hire a fast horse and a buggy, without a driver; put the
horse in the stable, but don’t unharness him, and shut the door. You
may go.” Schmidt went.

Left once more to himself, May examined the stores that had been left
by his familiar upon the oaken table. The inspection seemed to be
satisfactory. He then consulted his watch, and found with a start of
surprise that it was already afternoon. The watch was an elaborate
repeater, giving the hour, minute, and second, the signs of the zodiac,
the year of our Lord, and the day of the month. This latter was August
14th, as has been said; the time, after twelve.

May’s behavior upon this discovery was precipitate and peculiar. First,
he arranged with great care the calcium light apparatus so that it
commanded the front stoop of the house; then he carefully closed all
the shutters of the pavilion save the one toward the house. By this
window he sat, peering through the slats of the blind. The sun, getting
into the west, shone full upon the stone front porch; and May kept
still there, watching it, in the silence of the midsummer afternoon.




III.

PAUL AND VIRGINIA.


Thus fortified in a material way against the approach of any enemy, and
exalted in spirit above the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
the minutes seemed hours and space and time but mediums of his own
control. When his first pipe was finished he threw it aside and walked
openly out upon the lawn. The very birds were sleepy, and the park lay
spellbound in the shimmer of its own warm light. Austin took his way
along the margin of the pool; it was studded with white still lilies
that lay dreamily upon the green water; great gaudy dragon-flies
hung motionless upon the lily-petals, like silk-robed ladies in some
spotless marble hall.

What was it that gave such interest to the little familiar pool to
him, who had smoked his cigar by the lotos-pools of Yeddo’s moats, or
dreamed these same summer hours away by the fountain of the Court of
Lions in far Granada? Well enough knew Mr. Austin May what memory it
was that hung about the place; and he smiled his mature and mocking
smile as he remembered his boyish love. Many times had they two
wandered there, May Austin and himself, wandering together through
crusty Uncle Austin’s strange demesne; his uncle Austin, her aunt’s
husband. Old John Austin had married for love a poor and beautiful
cousin whose mother had engineered the marriage against the girl’s
will; and they had hated one another very cordially. Too proud to be
divorced, John Austin had built himself this strange pavilion where his
wife had promised she would never go. She kept her word faithfully;
and he never went into the house without first sending in his card.
They met in company, and with the greatest courtesy, and gave their
grand due dinners of sixteen, each at one end of the long table, with
a splendid high épergne between. Mrs. Austin had taken May Austin into
her lonely bosom, and Uncle John had had Austin May home from college,
where his bounty kept him, and had given him his taste for claret, and
tried to give his knowledge of the world. And they used to sit there,
he and his uncle, in this same pavilion, smoking, close hedged in from
womankind. And when the old man had fallen asleep, Austin would creep
out into the park, and walk there with his lovely cousin May. And on
one summer day, for all the world like this, he won her heart, this gay
young Harvard senior, all among the rushes by the lily-pool. And Austin
had gone back into the pavilion, quaking, to tell his uncle, and found
the latter very dignified and dead, a bottle of the famous Eclipse
Lafite close by his elbow. As with the old French poet

  “Hear ye, who are soon to die,
    What Villon did before he started--
  He drank one glass of Burgundy;
    This he did; and then, departed.”

the claret had not been wasted; its very last glass had been savored by
its master before his spirit took flight.

Austin May was overcome with horror. He ran and gave the alarm at the
house, and then sought his cousin May, whom he found, standing lovely,
in the twilight by the lilies. He kissed her, preliminarily, and put
his strong arm about her slender waist; then he broke the news to her,
and then he kissed her again, by way of peroration.

Now May Austin was shocked; but not so much so as if she had seen her
uncle since her aunt’s death, which had happened some three years
before. He had suffered--even commanded--that she should go on living
at the house; but since then, there being no covenance requiring
his attendance at the family table, he had lived, eaten, and drunk,
entirely in the pavilion. Miss Austin had had a fancy that she had
seen him groping about in the shrubbery from time to time, and spying
at her through the leaves; but upon the only occasion when she had
gone to see him--it was to thank him for some birthday present,
distantly conveyed--he had most mysteriously disappeared. But, as if
he appreciated her visit, and were doing her all the honor possible,
the fountain played its highest--an almost unheard-of thing since Mrs.
Austin’s death. When she had been alive, the fountain had always played
while she was walking in the garden. Uncle John, though prejudiced, was
always courteous.

But the next memory was clearer yet to Austin May; and even now a
twinge of sadness, as he recalled it, spoiled one puff or so of his
fragrant cabaña. For it was by this same lily-pool, a few days later.
Uncle Austin’s remains had been duly disposed of, according to the
terms of the will, and he and pretty May had met for the last time; the
last time for a few years, he had said; the last time forever, as she
had feared. Austin, indeed, had rebelled at this, and spoken boldly of
renouncing everything; but she had persevered, and made him see that it
was best, at least for a trial term of years, for him to comply with
his uncle’s last behest. And so he was going abroad; and she walked
with him, by the lily-pool, through the lawn, through the hedge to
the little seat beneath the linden that had been her favorite; and
there they had said good-by, with kisses and tears; and the same grim
station-master, messenger of fate! had carried him off in his carryall,
appropriately named. “The kisses had been very sweet, but the tears
had been superfluous.”

May smiled as he thought of this, and, lighting another cigar, went
back of the pavilion. There he threw back a drawer in the carven
oak-table and drew out the queer old will. It was nothing but a copy,
bearing the lugubrious skull and cinerary urn which form the seal of
the Norfolk County probate court; but it was already yellow with time,
and as May turned amusedly over the old leaves the dust dropped from
them upon his spotless Poole-built trousers. Ah, a good judge of claret
was old Uncle Austin; a good judge of claret and of other things. May
looked at the bottle of the famous Eclipse (he had not yet tasted it,
and there is a certain worldly wisdom about claret very inspiring to
those who meditate a practical course of action), and began to read.
But his hand shook, as he opened the will, and any doctor seeing him
would have treated our hero for nervous prostration, or sent him to a
faith-healer at the very least.

“In the name of God, Amen. I, John Austin, gentleman, being of sound
mind and disposing memory, and a widower, for which I am reverently
thankful” (it has been mentioned that Mrs. Austin died some years
before) “do make and declare this my last will and testament.

“My body I consign to ashes, and direct that it be duly cremated under
supervision of my executors; my soul I recommend to him who made it,
provided that He have not already taken the soul of Georgiana Austin
Austin, my late wife, under his same supervision, in which case I
reverently pray that it be left to my own disposition.

“I bequeath to my executors the sum of Five Thousand Dollars, and
direct that it be expended in the erection of a large white marble
monument to my late wife, aforesaid, said monument to be designed after
the florid manner of the later Gothic, and to be placed upon my family
lot at Mount Auburn, and to bear, besides the name of my late wife
aforesaid, but one inscription, viz.: A PERFECT WOMAN.

“I direct my executors to pay the sum of five hundred dollars annually
to the niece of my late wife aforesaid, May Austin, until she be
married; and upon her marriage I direct that said sum be annually paid
to her husband, for his sole use and consolation.

“I devise and bequeath my bin of Lafite claret, so-called Eclipse, to
my nephew, Austin May, together with all my other estate, real and
personal, stocks, bonds, moneys, goods, and chattels, wherever the
same be found, but subject only to the following condition, namely: I
direct my executors to manage and invest all such moneys and estate,
save the use of my house in Brookline, Massachusetts, which I give to
my said nephew directly; and all the income, rents, and profits of such
estate to pay over to my said nephew annually upon his sole receipt;
_provided_, that if he marry at any time within eleven years after
my death, or before he shall reach the age of thirty-five, whichever
shall first occur, then and in that case I revoke all the devises
and bequests to my said nephew aforesaid; but direct my executors
to deliver such of my Eclipse claret as then remains, to the most
prominent Total Abstinence Association which shall then exist in the
town of Boston; and all the rest and residue of my estate I devise and
bequeath absolutely and in fee to my residuary legatee. And I have
written the name of said----”

At this point in his reading, May heard a woman’s laugh. It seemed to
come from the shrubbery close by. In order to get more light for the
will, he had opened the middle slats of the blind toward the trees; so
that it almost seemed possible for a tall girl, standing close to the
pavilion, to look directly in. With inconceivable agility, May dropped
to the floor, beneath the window-sill, and ran rapidly around the large
room on his hands and knees, close to the wall. When beneath the table
where he had left his opera-glass, he took it up, and adjusting it
hastily, stood upon his knees, high enough to look through the open
shutter in the window toward the house. Sure enough, he had hardly got
the proper focus, when a young girl emerged from the shrubbery and
walked down the road. But she was very young, only eighteen or so, and
though admirably pretty, May was confident that he had never seen her
before. He watched her until she had disappeared in the distance; and
then, rising to his feet, returned to the reading of the will. But
first he altered the angle of the slats of the blind, so that it would
be impossible for anyone standing outside to look into the room.

“And I have written the name of the said residuary legatee in a sealed
envelope, which I hereby incorporate as part of this will and append
thereto; and I direct that said envelope be not opened, but remain in
the custody of my executors, or of the proper court, until my said
nephew marry, or reach the age of thirty-five, or until eleven years
have elapsed from the date of my death, whichever shall first happen;
and thereupon my said executors may open the same and deliver a copy
thereof to my said nephew; and proceed to pay over and deliver all my
estate, real and personal, to my residuary legatee therein mentioned.

“And I will explain, for the benefit of the gaping and the curious,
that this I do that my nephew may profit by my experience of early
marriages. For no man should by law be allowed to choose what woman
shall be his wife until he be arrived at the age when he may be hoped
to have sufficient discretion not to choose any woman at all.” Then
followed the appointment of executors; and that was all.

May laid aside the scandalous old will and began to think.

How he had laughed at the last clause, he and May Austin, as they
wandered by the lily-pond that evening! And when she had persuaded
him not at once to give it all up and marry penniless, he had tried
to make the best of it. If she would not marry him then, what were
eleven years? Eleven years--bah! August 14, 1886--why, he would only be
thirty-three and she twenty-seven! But she had refused to make it an
engagement, refused even to write to him; and the poor young Bachelor
of Arts had gone off to his steamer most unhappily. And that farewell
kiss under the lindens! And the letters he had written back--from
Liverpool--beseeching May Austin to reconsider her determination!
Austin May took another cigar from the box, and smiled pensively.




Scene Second

THE CODICIL




I.

AN IROQUOIS IN TROUVILLE.


From Liverpool Austin May went to London; from London to Paris; from
Paris by the special mail to Constantinople; thence to Athens and
Alexandria; and thence to Bombay and Calcutta and Hong Kong; and the
impetus of his flight had almost carried him over the Pacific and back
to America again, but that he held back on the shore of Japan. He
travelled in that country, then in Thibet or in Turkestan. Three years
were spent by him in the acquisition of strange drugs, curious pipes,
and embroideries, wild songs, and odd languages. He lived in Damascus,
Samarcand, Morocco, possibly in Timbuctoo. History records not nor does
May Austin, how often he wrote to her. But the summer of 1879 saw him
alight at the Gare de Lyon, in Paris. The heat and solitude of that
city were equally oppressive, and he fled to the nearest coast. That
evening he was seated, robed in soft cloth and starched linen, on the
wide veranda of the great _Hôtel des Rochers Noirs_, at Trouville.

No one who pines for outdoor life, primitive conditions, and
barbarism--and May was one of the wildest of these--but must admit
that the trammels, conventions, and commodities which so annoy him
are, after all, the result of infinite experiments of the human race,
conducted through all time; and as such, presumably, each one was
deemed successful when made, and adopted accordingly. No question but
that men had flannel shirts before starched linen, women flowing robes
and sandals before corsets and high-heeled shoes; and the prehistoric
“masher” knocked down his lady-love with a club before he learned to
court her with a monocle and a bunch of unseasonable roses. But all
these changes were, at the time, deemed improvements; and one who has
lived three years in Thibet or Crim-Tartary, and arrives suddenly at
Trouville, is in a fair position to judge impartially. And it is not
to be denied that May was conscious of a certain Capuan comfort, of
an unmanly, hot-house luxury, as he sat before the little table with
his carafe of ice, brandy, and seltzer, felt the cool stiffness of
his linen shirt, smoked his pressed _regalia_, and watched the ladies
with their crisp and colored dresses and their neat and silken ankles
as they mounted in their landaus for their evening drive. A full
string-orchestra was stationed among the electric lights near by, which
dispensed, with much verve, the light-hearted rhythms of the latest
opera bouffe; and beyond the planes and lindens shone the moonlit sea,
as if it also were highly civilized, and part of the decoration of the
place. May knocked the ashes from his cigar as who should say, “I,
too, am a Parisian of the nineteenth century;” quaffed a few sparkles
from the iced carafe and bottle, and pretended to be interested in
the latest Faits-Paris of _Figaro_. He was beginning to realize the
delights of youth and riches and free travel; he had been nothing but a
school-boy in America, and a sort of wild man since.

And as he so sat, there came to a table next him two people, and
sat down. One was a middle-aged man, with an iron-gray imperial, a
tight white waistcoat, and the rosette of the legion of honor at his
button-hole. The other was the most beautiful woman he had ever seen.
She was dressed in the most delicate and languorous cloud of violet
and gray, strengthened here and there by black lace; no ribbon, jewel,
or flower was on her lustrous black hair, or about the soft and creamy
neck; and she was evidently much absorbed in what her companion was
saying, for May could see that she clinched her fan in her hand that
was beneath the table until the delicate ivory broke. They talked very
rapidly, in French; but May, whose acquaintance with unknown oriental
dialects was so manifold and various, knew hardly French enough “to
last him over night.” And it is of especial importance that one’s
French should last over night.

Whatever they were saying, they were reiterating it with continually
increasing force. The man in the tight frock-coat began hissing it
between his pointed teeth, and the pretty woman crushed the last
fragment of the fan to ivory slivers on the floor. At last, the
gentleman rose, and with a _pardieu_ which even May’s untrained ear
could recognize, upset a champagne glass, and strode hastily away;
the lady eyed him until he disappeared, and then drooped her long
lashes, and hid her eyes in her pretty hand. Her bosom rose and fell
convulsively, and May’s chivalric heart beat sympathetically in the
same time. Suddenly her deep eyes opened, and opened full on Austin
May’s.

“Sir,” said she, in English, “you are a gentleman--save me!” Save her?
Aye, Austin May would have saved her from the devil or the deep sea,
and with no thought of salvage. All he said was, “Why, certainly.” It
afterward occurred to him that he should have said, “Pray, command
me, madam.” But this seemed to satisfy her, for she unbosomed herself
directly.

“I know I may trust an American,” said she. “Listen--I will confide
to you my true name. That man--that _mouchard_--with whom you saw
me, sinks I am ze Comtesse Polacca de Valska. Well, I am ze Comtesse
Polacca de Valska. Now you know all.”

Unfortunately, Austin May knew very little. But evidently the Comtesse
Polacca de Valska was a personage of European reputation. He bowed.

“What can I do?” said he, earnestly. “Madam de Valska has but to
command.” (This was better.)

“Hist!” said she, mysteriously. “Polacca de Valska--never mention ze
name. Eet ees a spell, in Poland; even now my noble Polacco languishes
in Siberia; but in France, in Russia--eet ees a doom. Say zat I--say
zat I am your compatriot--Mrs. Walkers--anysing.” And the nerve which
the unhappy countess had shown throughout the interview suddenly
collapsed. She burst into tears. As she dissolved, the American
congealed, all the blue blood of Boston rigid in his veins. When the
little Frenchman appeared, May offered his arm to the countess; and
together they swept proudly to the door of the hotel.

“_Arrêtez_,” cried the Frenchman. “_Connaissez-vous_--do you know,
sare, who it is?”

“It is my friend--my friend, Mrs. Peter Faneuil, of Boston,” said May,
with a readiness that charmed him at the time.

“_Mais, monsieur_----”

“Do you dare, sir, to----”

May glared at him for a moment, and the latter recoiled, like any
Frenchman, before his Anglo-Saxon attitude. They entered the hall of
the hotel; the countess pressed his arm convulsively in her gratitude,
her heart too full for words. “_Merci, chevalier_,” said she, simply.
May’s heart bounded at the compliment, and with satisfaction that he
understood her French. “I have a carriage here,” said she; and they
found the elegant landau still at the door.

“Where shall we go?”

“I will tell you later,” said she.

May got in, and a footman closed the door of the carriage. The liveried
coachman whipped up the horses, and the pair rolled forth into the
darkness of the summer night.

At this point in his recollections, May looked at his glass of claret
and re-lit his cigar; and though he did not know it, this was precisely
the course of action that had been adopted at the time by the Frenchman
with the rosette. He drew his chair up to the table where the countess
had been sitting, with a slight shrug of his padded shoulders, and
more imperturbability of manner than would have flattered the valiant
defender of oppressed beauty, had he been there to see it.

But at this period May was whirling along in the countess’s carriage,
through the darkness of the night, close by the sea-beach and the pale
shining of the long, slow surf.




II.

THESEUS AND ARIADNE.


The next morning May rose after a sleepless night, and wandered
pensively along the beach. His head was full of the Comtesse Polacca de
Valska; perhaps a drop or two of that charming personage had brimmed
over from his head into his heart. Their romantic drive had ended in
no more romantic a locality than the railroad station; there he had
parted from her, perhaps forever. For she had assured him that after
her meeting with the rosetted Frenchman the air of Trouville would not
be good for her, and she had taken the night mail for Paris. Her maid
was to follow on the next day with luggage. As soon as she was safely
established, and had, at least temporarily, thrown the enemies of her
unhappy country off her track, she was to let May (her deliverer, as
she entitled him) know, and he could see her again. But, alas! as she
tearfully remarked, that might never be. The French republic was now
seeking to curry favor with the despotism of the Czar, and even Prince
Obstropski had had to leave Paris for Geneva. Austin wanted to kiss her
hand as she departed, but feared lest this trivial homage should jar
upon a heroine like her. The bell rang, the guard cried out; one last
glance of her dark eyes, and all was over. She was gone, and May felt
that perhaps the most romantic episode of his life was ended.

He went back to the hotel, but, unfortunately, none of the famous
Eclipse claret was at hand. So he contented himself with brandy and
soda. Visions of nihilistic fair ones, of Polish patriots and _Italia
irredenta_ kept him wakeful through the night. For the Comtesse had
told him of her Italian descent, of her alliance with the great patriot
Milanese house, the Castiglioni dei Cascadegli.... And the Count
Polacco de Valski was immured for life in the Siberian mines.... Poor
devil! May cut another cigar, and reflected upon the Count’s unhappy
condition.

In a few days he received a letter from the countess. It was a mere
line, incidentally telling him that she had not established herself at
Paris, but at Baden-Baden; but it was principally filled with pretty
thanks for his “heroic chivalry.” The expression had seemed a trifle
too strong at the time, even to Austin May.

But when he arrived at Baden-Baden, and saw how charming the countess
was in her now elaborate _entourage_, he made allowances. Man is
generous by nature, especially to beautiful heroines with husbands in
Siberian mines. May thought of the hapless Polacco de Valski as turning
out polyform lead-pencils by the ribboned bunch, and marking them BBBB,
and then, alternately, HHHH. May had been much exercised in mind how to
explain his sudden trip to Baden-Baden, and had devised many plausible
reasons for going, all of which proved superfluous. The countess did
not seem in the least surprised. He found her weeping over a letter.
“See,” said she, “it is from Serge.”

“The d---- Really?” said May.

The countess folded the letter, kissed it, and replaced it in her
bosom. This was an extremely embarrassing proceeding to May, and he
kept some time silent. With his Anglo-Saxon awkwardness at social
comedy, he thought that Polacco might as well be kept out of the case.

“Shall we go for a drive?” said she, at last.

“Delighted,” said Austin May.

The drives about Baden-Baden are charming. You wind for miles upon the
brows of castle-crowned hills, overhanging the gay little valley; and
then you plunge into the ancient gloom of the Black Forest, and the
eerie pines, and a delicious shiver of wildness and solitude, all the
time with the feeling that the Kursaal and its band are close at hand,
should the silence grow oppressive. There, if your heart do trouble
you, you can look at pretty women; and, if the eternal verities beset
your spirit, gamble for napoleons.

The countess drove two little cream-colored ponies, and encouraged May
to smoke his cigarette most charmingly.... Bah! why go on with it? Even
now, over the Eclipse claret, May could not but admit that he had
spent in Baden-Baden three of the most charming weeks of his life. He
would not mind passing three such weeks again, could he be sure they
would be _just_ three such weeks, and that they would end at the same
time. But, _que diable!_ because the play is amusing, we do not wish to
stay in the theatre forever. And May nervously glanced at the window,
as he thought he heard the sound of carriage-wheels again. He had
smoked too much strong tobacco, probably; but, after all, it was even
now only the middle of the afternoon--not sunset, or near it. He might
have to come to stronger drugs than tobacco, to stronger deeds than
tobacco-smoke, ere the evening was over. Hence that arsenal with which
he had provided himself.

Well, to cut it short, he fell in love with her. Of course he did. He
adored her. Possible! He wanted to marry her. This seemed impossible;
but he had most certainly said so. He was barely twenty-five, and
she--well, she was older than he was. And she had a husband in the
Siberian mines. As May looked back upon it, this seemed her only
advantage. But, after all, it was her patriotism that first attracted
him--her heroism, her devotion to her unhappy cause, or causes. Italia
irredenta! Poland! Nihilism! For May was not quite clear which one or
more of these was chief in her mind; and nihilism was a new word then,
but it sounded dangerous and attractive. Could he not be her chevalier,
her lieutenant, her esquire? It was no more than Byron had done for
Greece, after all. He was free, independent (for the next eight
years)--broken-hearted, he was going to add, but stopped. After all,
May Austin had not refused to marry him; and three of the eleven years
were gone. At all events, there was nothing to prevent his attaching
himself to a forlorn hope, if he chose. Eight years of chances were in
his favor; and at the worst--if neither May Austin got married, nor
Polacco died--he could make a rescue of the husband from Siberia and
do the BB pencils himself. He lay awake many nights thinking of these
things, and at last he was emboldened to speak of them to her.

How well he remembered the day he did so! The day--but no, it was
evening. They had driven out after dinner, (did any man ever propose
before breakfast?) and the scene was a moonlit glade in the Black
Forest. The two ponies stood motionless; but their fair owner was much
moved as he poured into her delicate ear his desires and devotions. It
was so noble of him, she said, and was moved to tears. And then his
devotion to her unhappy country! and she wiped away another tear for
Poland or Italia irredenta. How she wished Serge could have met him,
and could know of this! And she wiped away another tear for Serge. But
no, my noble American--noble citizen of a free country! It could never
be. Poland and she must bear their woes alone. They could never consent
to drag down a brave young Bostonian in their wreck. And then, how
could she ever reward him? With her friendship, said Austin. But the
Comtesse seemed to think her friendship would be inadequate.

The scene was becoming somewhat oppressive; and May, at least, was
conscious of a certain difficulty in providing for it a proper
termination. In the excitement of the occasion, he had felt emboldened
to take one of her hands, which he still retained; the other was
holding the reins of the two cream-colored ponies. He could hardly
simply drop it--the hand and the conversation--without more; and yet
what suitable catastrophe could there be for the situation? Might he
kiss it, and cut the conversation? It were a mere act of courtesy, no
breach of respect to the absent Serge. As a boy of twenty-two he had
never dared; but as a man of twenty-five----

She did not seem in the least surprised. Possibly she had thought
him older than twenty-five. But May, after that little ceremony, had
dropped the hand most unmistakably; and she turned the ponies’ heads
away. May gave a last look to the forest-glade, as they drove out from
it, and reflected that the place would be impressed upon his memory
forever. It was really astonishing the number of places that were to be
impressed upon his memory forever!

A restless week followed. He saw the Countess de Valska every day; but
there was something uncomfortable in their relations--a certain savor
of an unaccepted sacrifice, of an offering burned in vain.

The countess would not let him seek the Austrian foe on her own behalf,
nor yet bedew the soil of Poland with his blood; and it was very
difficult to say what he was to do for her in Baden-Baden, or, for
matter of that, what the noble Polacco de Valski could do in Siberia.
Poor Serge!

Yes, poor Serge! On the eighth day, Austin May, calling on the
countess, found her in a lovely _négligé_, dissolved in tears. (He had
been refused her door, at first, but finally, after a little pressing,
had been admitted.) The countess did not look up when he entered; and
Austin stood there, twisting his hat in sympathy, and looking at her.
Suddenly she lifted her head, and transfixed his blue eyes with her
dewy black ones.

“Dead!” said she.

“What?” responded May, anxiously. “Poland? Ital----”

“No, no!” she cried. “Serge--Serge!”

“Your husband?” cried he--“the Count Polacco----”

The countess dropped her lovely head in a shower of tears, as when a
thick-leaved tree is shaken by the wind, just after rain.

“He has been dead a year and a half,” she moaned.

“A year and a half?”

“Nineteen months. He died on the 23d of February, 1877--three weeks
after the last letter that I ever got from him.”

“But how--but how did you never know?” said May, wildly.

“Was it not cruel? The despotism of the White Czar! Sometimes they
would keep his letters for a year, sometimes they would let them
come directly. They would not let me know for fear that I--ah, God!”
She sprang to her feet with a sweep of her long robe, and shook her
jewelled finger at the chandelier.

“Can you blame us that we kill and die for such a despotism, such
a tyranny, as that?” Then suddenly, as she crossed by a sofa, she
straightened up to her full height, like a wave cresting, poised a
brief second, then fell in a heap--a graceful heap--her head resting on
the sofa in her hands.

Then the young man had to seek, not to console her, but to calm
her, to lift her from the floor, to bring her ice-water, a fan,
a feather, pour oil and salt upon the wound, toilet-vinegar, or
other salads. May never knew exactly what he did; but it was like
consoling an equinoctial gale. Hardly had she got fairly calm, and
sobbing comfortably, and sitting in a chair, and he beside her--and
he remembered patting her clasped hands, as one does a spoiled
child’s--when she would dash upright, upsetting the chair, and
swear her vengeance on the cruel Czar.... And at this point in his
reminiscences May winced a little; for he had by no means a distinct
recollection that he had not sworn his vengeance on the Czar with hers.
And, when you come to think of it, the Czar’s injuries to Mr. May cried
not as yet for deeds of blood.




III.

DIDO AND ÆNEAS.


May repeated his visit of condolence every day for several weeks. At
the end of that time the season at Baden-Baden was drawing to a close,
and it became necessary that the countess should betake herself and her
sorrowing heart to some other refuge. May knew this, and it troubled
him.

For he now felt that he not only admired Mme. de Valska as a patriot,
but that he loved her as an exceedingly beautiful and fascinating
woman. Surely, here was the heroine of his youthful dreams--a life that
were a poet’s ideal.

To link himself with her and her noble aims, to be a Byron without the
loneliness, to combine fame in future history with present domestic
bliss--what a career!

He loved the countess, he adored her; and he fancied that she deigned
to be not indifferent to his devotion, to his sympathy. But--there was
the shadow of the late count.

And the countess seemed much broken by his death. True, she no longer
gave way to wild bursts of passion; she never wept; in fact, in
Austin’s presence, she rarely mentioned him. But there was a sadness,
a weak and lonely way about her, as if she could not live without
her Serge’s protecting arm. It must have been a moral support, as he
could have done but little from his Siberian mine; but, whereas she
used to be brave, enterprising, facing the world alone, now she seemed
helpless, confiding, less heroic, perhaps, but still more womanly.
Austin only loved her the more for that And it emboldened him a little.
After all, her husband had been dead a year and a half, though she had
only known of it a few weeks. He determined to speak. Why should his
life’s happiness--possibly hers--be wrecked upon a mere scruple of
etiquette?

He took his opportunity, one day, when she spoke of Italy. (Now, that
the count was dead, she seemed to think less of unhappy Poland, and
more of unredeemed Italy; as was natural, she being a Cascadegli.) He
took her hands at the same time, and begged that she would redeem him
with Italy. His life, his fortune, were at her service, should she
but give him the right to protect her, and fight her battles for her
always. “I know,” he added earnestly, “how your heart still bleeds for
your noble husband. But your duty is to your country, to yourself. And
remember, though you heard of it but yesterday, the Count Polacco has
been dead a year and a half.”

“Nineteen months,” sighed the countess, with a sob, going him four
weeks better. And before he left the room they were engaged. He did not
go to bed that night; but wandered in the moonlight, treading as on
clouds. Favored young man!

In the morning, he noticed with delight that she had laid aside her
long crape veil. Already, said she, her country called for her; she
must recommence her labors, and the deep mourning would attract too
much notice. May had vaguely fancied she would start at once for Milan
or Warsaw, and after a few months’ delay he would meet her, and they
would have a quiet marriage ceremony. But she explained to him that
the true arena of her labors was in Paris. Here was the focus of
conspiracies; here she must live and have a _salon_, and call together
her devoted countrymen. Here she would need his protection, and, with
his American passport, he could safely visit her oppressed fatherland,
when events required action on the spot.

Obviously, as he recognized with joy, this plan made it necessary
for them to be married immediately. But then he must speak to her of
his uncle’s will. Not that it mattered much; he was quite ready to
renounce fortune, even life, for her; but she must know that they
would not be rich. It was a mere formality; but it must be done. So he
told her of the curious will; and how, if he married before August the
fourteenth, 1886, he was to lose all his uncle’s property, even to what
remained of the celebrated Eclipse claret. But then, what was money?
Particularly to them, who had no other aims than love and patriotism;
both commodities not to be bought, or measured in sterling exchange
or napoleons. But the countess seemed to attach much weight to May’s
communication.

Money, alas! was in these sordid times necessary, even for patriotic
revolutions. The wheels must be greased, even when Bucephalus drew the
chariot. Still, this was not the essential. She was quite willing to
share her small fortune with the man whom she loved; but how could she
bear to ruin him--to make her alliance his sacrifice? Suppose he should
ever repent his action? And here May began to make his oaths eternal;
but she stopped him. Was there no other way? Could there be no escape,
no legal device? Lawyers would do almost anything, if paid enough. But
May shook his head, and pressed again her hand to his lips; and her
dark eyes brimmed with tears.

She, for herself, would be willing to suffer him as her adorer, to
trust him as her knight, her follower, as he once had proposed before.
And, by that arrangement, he would not lose the fortune. But what would
the world say--the cold and heartless world? And she looked at May
imploringly, as if for advice.

And May had to admit, in answer, that the world would be
likely to make itself as disagreeable as usual under similar
circumstances--particularly, now that the unhappy count was dead, and
could no longer defend his heroic consort from the spite of petty
spirits. The moral support was something, after all. May had true
Boston reverence for what the world said; and it never occurred to
him that even a heroine, who had braved two emperors, might brave its
verdict.

For some moments neither spoke. What was there to say? But the silence
grew oppressive; and at last she broke it with a cry.

“Farewell, then,” said she.

But at this May broke out with a round oath. Farewell it should never
be. What cared he for his uncle’s fortune, or for the estate in
Brookline, when his future lay in Poland? He would have a little left;
he could win more by his own exertions. For a moment his impetuosity
almost overbore her resistance. But then the Paris _salon_ was a
necessity; and half of her own estate and all of poor Polacco’s had
been seized by foreign despots. She would think it over. She would
give him an answer that night. And then there came a lover’s parting;
and May went back to his hotel, not wholly desperate, and got the
engagement-ring he had ordered, and sent it to her. It was of small
diamonds; but then there was a necklace, sent from Paris, of perfect
Oriental pearls. A woman could afford to get engaged once a month, for
such a necklace.

And he had gone back that evening, and he had found a letter. The
countess had gone, leaving the note behind her. It was edged with deep
black; and May took it now from his pocket-book, yellow and worn, with
a smile that would have been cynical had it not been slightly nervous.

“_Très-cher!_” it began, “I cannot bear” (it was all in French, but
we will make clumsy English of the countess’s delicate phrase, as did
May, when he read it now) “that your love for me should be your ruin.
It is too late for me to deny that you also have my heart; I can only
fly. Otherwise my woman’s weakness would destroy either you or myself.
I shall go by the morning train to Frankfurt, where I shall stop two
days. If you do not wish to betray me, seek not my refuge out. I shall
keep the ring as a pledge” (she says nothing about the necklace, it
occurred to May, at this late date)--“a pledge that I shall be faithful
to you, as, I hope, you to me. For what are six or seven years?”
(At her age! thought May, with a shudder.) “I will devote them to
my unhappy countrymen.” (_Compatriotes_ was the original, which may
be feminine.) “But wait for me until you are free; and perhaps, who
knows? my Italy redeemed! I will join you, and be one with you forever.
Meantime you will travel, possibly forget me! But on the fourteenth of
August, 1886, you will be at home. _On that day you will hear from me!_”

May laid the letter down and shuddered. This was most unquestionably
the fourteenth day of August in the year eighteen hundred and
eighty-six. He seized nervously the glass of claret; but, as he raised
it to his lips, looked through the blinds, in the direction of the
house. His second glass of claret fell unheeded to the floor.

A carriage was standing before the front door, and beside it stood a
footman in livery.




Scene Third

THE ADMINISTRATION




I.

THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.


The three years following May’s unhappy affair with the Countess
Polacca de Valska had been uneventful. He had not plunged again into
foreign parts, but became a student of the barbarities of civilization.
He saw what is termed the world, particularly that manifestation of
it which attains its most perfect growth in London and Paris. Perhaps
it would be too much to say that he forgot the Countess de Valska,
but certainly his feelings toward that unhappy fair one underwent
certain modifications. And as he was in the meantime in the receipt of
some twenty thousand a year from the estate of the late John Austin,
he by degrees became more reconciled to the extremely practical view
the cruel countess had taken of their duties in relation to that
gentleman’s will.

He very often wondered as to who might be the residuary legatee. It
would be a wild freak, that he was sure of. It was quite on the cards
for Uncle Austin to have provided that, since his nephew did not want
the money, it might go to the devil for all he cared--or to the Total
Abstinence Society.

It is more sad to say that, as time went by, certain metaphysical
doubts as to the objective reality of the Cascadegli and the Siberian
mine began to obtrude themselves. Faith of the most stubborn
description remained to him, so far as the countess’s Paris salon and
her beautiful self was concerned, but he failed to see the necessary
connection between Trouville, Baden-Baden, Italia Irredenta, and the
Parisian police. And Serge had removed himself, for an encumbrance, in
a singularly accommodating way.

But May was a man of his word; and he looked forward, at first eagerly,
and afterward with mingled emotions, to their promised next meeting in
Brookline, Mass.

The woman Byron might have married was not the wife for Talleyrand. And
May’s volcanic or Byronic age had passed, and he was in the tertiary
period. Taking her for all she said she was, she wouldn’t do in
society, and he doubted that she was all she said she was.

However, it gave him no serious trouble until after his acquaintance
with the beautiful Mrs. Terwilliger Dehon. Youth has a long future
ahead of it, and a young man of twenty-seven easily discounts
obligations maturing only in six years. But when May was thirty, and
well launched in London society--whether it was the charms of Mrs.
Dehon aforesaid, or the vanishing of youthful heroism and that increase
of comfort which attends middle life--a political heroine like the
Countess Polacca de Valska no longer seemed to him the ideal consort
for a man of his temperament.

Young men have their time for falling in love with comédiennes upon the
stage; and then they turn to the comédiennes of real life. Only in the
latter case it is to be noted that they ever prefer the heroines of a
tragedy.

It was on the very evening before all advice became superfluous, that
he confided his troubles to Tom Leigh, and asked his advice. Tom
Leigh advised him that “he was in a devil of a hole.”

“But what am I to do?” said May. “I am bound to meet her--in five
years.”

“Perhaps she won’t come,” said Tom. But Austin shook his head. If she
didn’t come, there was May Austin--but he checked himself. He had never
spoken of his cousin to Tom Leigh. She was doubtless married ere this;
and if she wasn’t, he preferred her to the countess.

“Perhaps her husband ain’t dead,” suggested the resourceful Tom. But
May smiled, bitterly. “I guess he’s dead enough--much as ever he was.”

“Then I don’t see but what you’ll have to stand the breach of promise
suit,” Tom concluded, with a grin. In these misfortunes, truly, there
is something pleasant to our best friends. We know that Messrs. Winkle
and Tupman must have chuckled in secret over even Bardell vs. Pickwick.
But the idea was unspeakably awful to our fastidious hero. Moreover, he
darkly imagined that the countess had other resources than a breach of
promise suit.

This was on the evening before the hunt; on that epochal brink of their
first meeting. And on the next day all this talk became superfluous; as
superfluous as for Falstaff to demand the time of day.




II.

A LEAD OF HEARTS.


Mrs. Terwilliger Dehon--ah, Mrs. Dehon! Great heavens! why had they
not met earlier--before she had sacrificed herself upon Terwilliger’s
commonplace altars--before her radiant youth had been shrouded in
tragedy?

The Russo-French police may be successfully evaded, but not so the laws
of society. Naught but misery could he see in store for them both--one
long life-agony of divided souls.

Of course, it took some time before this dismal prospect lay fairly out
before them. At their first meeting there was nothing sadder in sight
than the purple hills of Exmoor and the clear cascade of Bagworthy
Water; and their talk was broken only by the cheerful yelp of hounds.
And there had been fortune, too, in this; fortune we call fate, when
fortune turns out ill. He had hardly seen her at the Cloudsham meet,
and but just knew who she was. Thither he had gone with his friends,
the Leighs, to see the red deer hunted in his ancient lair; and as he
stood there, snuffing with his horse the sea-breeze that came up from
Porlock Bay, immaculate in coat and patent-leathers, she had ridden up
with a fat and pursy citizen beside her. This stall-fed citizen was
horse-back on another square-built brute, and it was very Psychecide
to call the wretch her husband. A Diana, by heaven! thought he; and,
indeed, she sat her horse as any goddess might, and clothed her own
riding-habit as the moon her covering of cloud.

“Who’s that?” said he to Tom Leigh.

“That’s the girl that married old Dehon,” said Tom. “She did it----”

But when or how she did it Austin never knew, for just then there was
a joyous baying from the hounds, and whish! they scampered downward,
skirting hanging Cloudsham Wood. Unluckily, they were at the wrong end
of the field, and before they reached the steep bit of gorsy moor that
overlooks the valley everyone else who meant to ride had disappeared in
the cover of the forest. She reined in her beautiful horse on the very
brink, and looked up the valley over Oare Hill; May stood a few yards
below and looked down the valley in the direction of Porlock. Then she
looked down the valley to Porlock, and May looked up the valley to Oare
Hill. And their eyes met.

Her beautiful eyes glanced quickly off, like a sunbeam from a single
eyeglass. She turned, as if in sudden decision, and sped like an arrow
over the high moor. May’s eyes followed her; and his soul was in his
eyes, and his body went after the soul. One dig of the spurs nigh
unseated him, as if his spirited horse scorned such an incitement to
chivalric duty; and so, for some twenty minutes on end they rode, May
neither gaining nor losing, and both out of sight of the rest of the
hunt. Now and then the cry of hounds came up from the forest-valley on
the right, and May fancied he heard below a crashing as of bushes; but
he had faith in his guiding goddess and he took her lead.

The high winds whistled by his head, and there were blue glimpses of
the sea and wide gray gleams of misty moorland; but the soft heather
made no sound of their mad gallop, and May was conscious of nothing
else save the noble horse before him and the flutter of the lady’s
riding-habit in the wind. Now the earth that rushed beneath was yellow
with the gorse, now purple with the heather; here, he would sail over
a turf-bank, there, his horse would swerve furiously from the feeling
of an Exmoor bog; where she would ride, he would ride. This he swore
to himself; but she rode straight, and he could make no gain. At the
top of the moor, almost on the ridge of Dunkery Beacon, was a narrow
cart-path, fenced six feet high in ferny turf, after the usual manner
of Devonshire lanes. May saw it and exulted; this was sure to turn her,
till she found a gate at least.

But his beautiful chase rode up the gentle inner incline and sailing
over the lane like a bird, was lost to sight upon the other side.

“By heavens!” swore May to himself. “She means to kill herself.”

He rode at it and cleared the six-foot width of lane successfully; but
his horse could not bunch his legs upon the narrow bank beyond. He
rolled down it, and May over his head into a bank of heather.

The eager American prematurely began to swear before his head struck
the ground; and before his one moderate oath was finished, he was upon
his horse and off again. Mrs. Dehon had not even turned round upon his
disaster; but May was none the less attracted to her by that. What was
mortal mishap to a spirit wrecked like hers? Why should she?

They were riding down hill now; and she was riding a little more
carefully, favoring her horse. But May cared neither for his horse nor
his neck by this time. Straight down the hill he rode; and by the time
they reached the Lynn he had gained the quarter-mile he lost. Here she
had pulled up her horse, and he pulled up his at a courteous distance;
and both sat still there, in the quiet valley; and the noise of their
horses’ breathing was louder than the rustle of the wind in the old
ash-trees around them.

May wondered if his pilot was at fault; but hardly had the thought
crossed his mind before they heard again the music of the hounds, at
full cry; and far up, two or more miles away, toward the Countisbury
road, they saw the stag. Though so far off, he was distinctly visible,
as he paused for one moment on the brow of the black moor, outlined
against the blue sky; then he plunged downward, and the hounds after
him, and May’s horse trembled beneath him; and May wondered why his
goddess was not off.

But instead of riding down to meet the hunt, along the valley of the
East Lynn, by Oare Church and Brendon, she turned and rode up in the
direction of Chalk-water. May followed; and hardly had they left the
Lynn and gone a furlong up the Chalk-water Combe, when she struck sharp
to the right, breasting the very steepest part of Oare Oak Hill. If she
knew that he was behind her, she did not look around; and May again had
all that he could do to keep his guide in sight.

And now the event proved her skilful venery. For as they crested Oare
Oak Hill, and the long bare swell of the moor rolled away before them,
the sharp cry of the hounds came up like sounds of victory in the
valley just below. Well had Diana known that either way of the Lynn
would be too full of his enemies for the now exhausted deer to take. It
must make for Bagworthy Water. Long ere they had ridden down the Lynn
to the meeting of the streams, the hunt would have passed; but now, as
they looked across and along the lonely Doone Valley, they saw the full
pack far down at their feet, close by the foaming stream.

Then May could see his leader whip her horse, as if she would open the
gap between them; and he set his teeth and swore that he would overtake
her, this side the death. And he gained on her slowly, and the purple
and yellow patches mingled to a carpet as they whirled by him, and he
felt the springing of his horse’s haunches like the waves of a sea; and
below them, hardly apace with them, was the hunt and the cry of hounds.
Down one last plunging valley--no, there was another yet to cross, a
deep side-combe running transversely, its bottom hid in ferns. But the
hounds were now abreast of them, below, and there was no time to ride
up and around. May saw her take it; and as she did, a great shelf of
rock and turf broke off and fell into the brook below. He saw her turn
and wave him back; it was the first notice she had taken of him; and
he rode straight at the widened breach and took it squarely, landing
by her side. Then, without a word, they dashed down, alongside of the
slope, and there, in upper Bagworthy Waters, found the deer at bay, and
the hounds; but of the hunt no sign, save Nicholas Snow, the huntsman,
with reeking knife. He had already blooded his hounds; and now he sat
meditatively upon a little rock by the stream, his black jockey-cap in
his hands, looking at the body of the noble stag, now lifeless, that
had so lately been a thing of speed and air. A warrantable deer it was,
and its end was not untimely.

May pushed his panting horse up nearer hers. She was sitting
motionless, her cheeks already pale again, her eyes fixed far off upon
the distant moor. “Mrs. Dehon!” said he, hat in hand.

The faintest possible inclination of her head was his only response.

“I have to thank you for your lead,” said May.

For one moment she turned her large eyes down to him. “You ride well,
sir,” said she.

When the M. D. H. and others of the hunt came up, they found these two
talking on a footing of ancient friendship. The slot was duly cut off
and presented to Mrs. Dehon; and many compliments fell to our hero’s
share, for all of which May gave credit to the beautiful huntress
beside him.

Tom Leigh cocked his eye at this, but did not venture to present him to
her after that twenty-mile run. It were throwing the helve after the
hatchet, to present the man after the heart. And thus it happened that
to her our hero was never introduced.

When Mr. Dehon arrived, some hours later, Tom Leigh led him up. “Mr.
Dehon,” said he, “I think that you should know my particular friend,
Mr. Austin May.” And Tom Leigh cocked his eye again.

May looked at the pursy little old man, and felt that his hatred for
him would only be buried in his enemy’s grave. But his enemy was
magnanimous, and promptly asked them both to dinner, which May did not
scruple to accept.




III.

PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDA.


Austin May fell devoutly in love with Mrs. Dehon. This was without
doubt the _grande passion_ of his life. And it was hopeless.

He was just at the age when such affairs are sternest realities to
modern men. He was beyond the uncertainty of youth, and before the
compromises and practicalities of middle life. And there was something
about Gladys Dehon to make a man who cared for her ride rough-shod,
neck or nothing, over all things else. All the world admired her; would
have loved her had it dared. There was no daring about it in Austin’s
case; his audacity was not self-conscious; he simply followed her as he
had followed her over combe and beacon on that Exmoor day.

People could tell him little about her, save that she had been very
poor and very proud, and was very beautiful. Gladys Darcy--that had
been her name--last of a broken family of Devon and of Ireland. She had
neither sister nor brother, only a broken-down father, long since sold
out of his Household captaincy. She had sold herself to Terwilliger
Dehon, the rich speculator; and she was his, as a cut diamond might
have been his; bought with his money, shining in his house, and he
no more within her secret self than he might have been within the
diamond’s brilliant surface. And two months after the wedding her old
father had died and made the sacrifice in vain. Then she became the
personage that the world knew as the “beautiful Mrs. Dehon.” May used
to dream and ponder about her, long hours of nights and days; and he
fancied that something about her life, her lonely bringing-up, her
father’s precepts, had made her scornfully incredulous of there being
such a thing as the novelist’s love in life. She had been a greater
nature than her father, and all mankind had been nothing to her as
compared with even him. Too early scorn of this world’s life prepares
the soul for evil compromises.

Her character, her nature, she expressed in no way whatever. She had
neither intimate friends, charitable occupations, tastes, follies, nor
faults. She shone with a certain scornful glitter of splendor, but even
of old Dehon’s millions she was not prodigal. She never flirted; she
never looked at one man long enough for that. Her one occupation was
hunting, and she rode to hounds in a way to jar the nerves of every M.
F. H. in England.

Tom Leigh was afraid of her; and when they were asked for a week’s
visit that autumn, in their box in Leicestershire, refused to go. May
went. And if there was a man of whom she was not utterly unconscious,
he surely was the one. Perhaps there was something about his way that
she liked. For, with neither much speech, delay, nor artifice, our
hero made his heart and soul up into a small packet and threw them
into her deep eyes; and when she looked at him, he had them; and when
she looked away, they were gone. And this he did perfectly frankly and
directly, but without spoken words. The world saw it as clearly as did
she, and liked him none the less for it. He was quite incapable of any
effort to conceal it; old Terwilliger might have seen it had he been
so minded. Possibly he did, and the knowledge lent an added value to
his chattel in the old stockbroker’s mind. Mrs. Dehon herself treated
May with perfect simplicity, but with an infinite gentleness, as the
moon-goddess might have looked upon Endymion.

This state of things got to be perfectly well known to the world.
Such things always are well known to the world; nothing is more
striking than the perfect openness with which our heart-histories are
revealed in modern life, except perhaps the ease with which those most
intimately concerned maintain a polite and unembarrassed appearance
of utter ignorance upon the subject. All the world loves a lover,
particularly a hopeless one; and it was quite the _mot d’ordre_ of
society that year for people to ask Mrs. Dehon and the handsome
American to their houses together.

And Mrs. Dehon? Well, before the coming of spring she felt a great
and trustful friendship for this incidental castaway upon the waters
of her troubled life. May afterward remembered that she told him many
things about herself; and she had spoken of herself to no one else
before, her own father included. She even let him see a little of her
heart. And it is an axiom that he who sees ever so little of a woman’s
heart has but to take it. Seeing is possession. This is the wisdom of
the fair Melusine, and other wise old mediæval myths.

It is needless to say that May had absolutely forgotten the Countess
de Valska; more completely than even she had forgotten the Siberian
mausoleum of her Serge. If May thought of her once in that year, it was
to dismiss her memory with a curse for his own folly, and a mental oath
that no Trouvillian countess would part him, should his way ever be
clear to Gladys Darcy. He would not recognize the hated name of Dehon,
even in his thoughts.

In his despair, he confided in Tom Leigh again. Tom saw no reason to
change his previous opinion. The hole seemed if anything deeper, now
that two were in it. “I don’t see but what you’ve got to escape the
countess, bring Serge to life, kill old Terwilliger, and thus give her
two years’ mourning,” said he. “Why the deuce didn’t you find her out
first?” he added, ruefully. “Old Terwilliger only married her eighteen
months ago.”

“I don’t know,” said May. “Why don’t you invent his railway schemes,
and discover his Cornish mines?”

“True,” assented Tom. “Old Dehon always does get in on the ground
floor. However,” he added, brightening up, “if you can marry her,
you’ll get her and his money, too.”

“Damn his money,” said May.

Tom looked shocked, and changed the subject, and May’s heart continued
so to bleed internally that soon Gladys Dehon’s marble brow would
soften to pity as she saw him wane. Meantime Terwilliger’s capon-lined
stomach waxed apace, and even his digestion was to all appearance
unimpaired.

Now, it is probable that ours is the first civilization known to
history where this state of things could exist, be mutually known,
and continue in tranquil permanency. But it does--that is, it nearly
always does--and it is a credit, after all, to our teaching and our
times that it does so. The ancient Perseus cut Andromeda’s chains, and
departed with her by the next P. and O. steamer they could signal; the
modern one sits down on the strand beside her, and he and Andromeda die
to slow music--that is, in case either should chance to die before the
malady is cured. And Andromeda’s master relies on the strength of his
chains and on Perseus’s good bringing-up, and is not wholly displeased
at the situation. Particularly for a sly old stock-broker like
Terwilliger Dehon, whose idea of values is based on the opinion of the
street, a Perseus to his Andromeda is half the fun. The world, on the
whole, approves the situation; but the husband Dehon is not a popular
character, and it likes the Perseus better. Not, of course, that it
is willing to condone anything improper, particularly on the part of
Andromeda.

But Austin May stood the passive rôle for precisely twelve months;
and then he made up his mind that something would have to break. He
hoped it might be the neck of old Terwilliger; but Providence seldom
spoils a dramatic situation by so simple a denouement. And, to tell the
truth, considering the way the three rode to hounds, it was much more
likely to be his own or Gladys’s. One thing was sure: their triangular
relations were too strained to continue. He came to this conclusion
after one precisely similar day upon Exmoor, a year after their first
meeting; except that upon this occasion the deer took to the sea below
Glenthorne and was drowned, and he and Gladys rode homeward side by
side in silence.

Accordingly, that night Austin May wrote a letter; and in the morning
showed Terwilliger a telegram from America, took his departure, shook
hands hard with old Terwilliger, barely touched the slender fingers of
his wife, but, when he did so, left the letter in her hand. May kept no
copy of this letter; but he remembered it very well. It ran as follows:


  “GLADYS:

  “I must not stay in England any more. I cannot bear it. I know that
  you are unhappy, and I must go where, at least, I shall not see it.
  Nor can I trust myself with you after our ride of yesterday.

  “Remember always that, wherever I am, I am always and only yours.
  This is a very strange thing to say; but I think there are times when
  men and women should show each other their hearts, however much the
  truth may shock the prudes and pedants. And I do very much wish to
  say that if ever you are free, I ask you to marry me.

  “It is a sad thing that the circumstances of your wedded life are
  such that I can say these things to you and not offend you. But you
  have shown me enough of your heart for this.

  “I go now into Asia. A trivial duty will call me to my family home
  for one day, on August 14, 1886. Then, if I do not hear of you there,
  I shall disappear again. After that I shall write you once a year.

                                                          “Good-by,

                                                                 “A. M.”




Scene Fourth


THE FINAL ACCOUNTS




I.

ÆNEAS AND CAMILLA.


Poor Austin! A boy’s love feeds on the romance of hopelessness,
flourishes apace in the shadow of despair; it delights in patient
waiting, in faithful fidelity, in lapses of years; but a man’s is
peremptory, immediate, uncompromising. Some secret instinct bids a
Romeo to contemplate a tragedy with cheerfulness; and ten to one that
his years of gloom change, as they fall behind him, to “_un joli
souvenir_.” But a man, middle-aged, knows when he wants his Dulcinea,
and he wants her here and now. No glamour of blighted affections can
make up for the hard facts of life to him.

When a middle-aged man can’t get the woman he wants, there are three
recognized and respectable courses open to him. He works a little
harder, plays a good deal harder, or he marries someone else. The last
was out of the question for a man so consumed by the fires of passion
as Austin May, but the fuel of his heart was transformed into nervous
energy of the entire system. He plunged again, like a rocket, into
a rapid and circuitous course of travel and adventure; and, after a
brilliant career through the remote East, descended, like a burned-out
stick, some fifteen months later, in San Francisco. Thence he went home.

The fact was, he wanted rest. His heart was tired of throbbing, his
head weary with thinking. And all his mad adventure had only tired the
body, had made him sleep at night, nothing more. He had been through
the world again, but Gladys Dehon was all of it to him. He thought of
her now with a certain dull pain--less madly, more hopelessly, than in
England the two years before.

He could not bear to go back to his home. He went to Boston, and he
saw his lawyers; but he did not go out to Brookline. This he vowed he
would not do until that day when he had promised Gladys he would be
there. He did not forget that he had promised the countess, too; but
he was no longer so much troubled by the countess. He would kill her,
if necessary.

Meantime, he went to pass the winter in New York. He had himself
elected a member of two fashionable clubs. He followed the hounds in
Long Island and in Jersey. He went to dinners and he danced at Germans,
albeit with an aching heart. He renaturalized himself; he made friends
with his countrymen, and he studied his countrywomen. He got himself
once more _désorienté_ in American society. He observed what respect
was everywhere shown to the VanDees, and how little, comparatively,
one thought of the McDums. He found that civilization was pitched on
a higher scale, financially, than he had supposed. Thirty thousand
a year was none too much for a man to marry on. Now, Austin had not
over twenty thousand, even if he fulfilled the hard conditions of his
uncle’s will.

He took an interest in yachting, and gave orders for a cutter that was
to beat the prevailing style of sloop. He also imported a horse or
two, and entered one of them at Sheepshead Bay. He had a luxuriously
furnished flat, near Madison Square. He went to St. Augustine in the
spring, with the VanDees, and while there was introduced to Georgiana
Rutherford. He saw her afterward in New York, and early in June he
asked her to marry him.

Miss Rutherford was a young lady of supreme social position, great
wealth, and beauty. She had for two years been the leading newspaper
belle of New York society. Her movements, her looks, her dresses, the
state of her health, the probable state of her affections--everything
about her, to the very dimples in her white shoulders--had been
chronicled with crude precision in the various metropolitan journals
having pretensions to _haut ton_ (for high tone is not a good
translation), and had thence been eagerly copied throughout the
provincial weeklies of the land. Miss Rutherford was absolutely a
person to be desired.

It would not be fair to May to say that he was false to Gladys Dehon.
His passion for her, too vehement, had fairly burned itself out. In the
two years since he had left her, May’s heart had, as it were, banked
its volcanic fires. However fissured were its ravined depths, the
surface was at rest, and the lava-flood that concealed it was already
cool. And a beautiful huntswoman who had ridden out of sight of her
first husband, as had Gladys Dehon, was not at all the sort of person
for middle-aged Austin May to marry and bring to Boston. These things
he felt for some weeks before he proposed to Miss Rutherford, and she
was precisely the sort of girl he saw was best. If old Uncle Austin
had selected her himself, he could not have made a better choice. And
well, thought May, he saw the motives of his kind old uncle’s will,
and the wisdom born of much experience, and long consideration and a
knowledge of Eclipse claret that had prompted it. A young man, if left
to himself, would choose him a different wife for each three years of
his life. It is only after he has run the gamut of all impossibilities
that he settles down upon the proper thing. And this, at last, May felt
assured that he had done.

May did not pretend to himself that he loved Georgiana Rutherford as
he had loved Gladys Dehon. Even now, he was not blind to that. But he
thought that she was pretty, and well-placed, and good style; and she
had a large fortune, and a still larger family connection, all of the
very best securities.

In fact, May, at least so far as he admitted to himself, did not do
justice to the qualities of Miss Rutherford. Miss Rutherford was a very
charming girl; much cleverer and much better educated, to say nothing
of her style and beauty, than any embryo Gladys Dehon that May had
ever seen. She was perfectly mistress of her own heart, as she was of
her own fortune, and it was dangerous to present to her foreigners,
lest they afterward shot themselves. They always went wild about her;
much to Miss Rutherford’s discomfort. Some would besiege her; others
would curse her; others, still, say evil things about her in the true
Parisian manner. Miss Rutherford remained “more than usual calm”
through it all.

She had the reputation of being a flirt, but it was not so. She tried
her adorers, Portia-like, successively; the moment that they failed
to reach a certain standard, it was entirely right and fair for her
to drop them. Some of them would cry that they were hurt, and these
she contemned from her very soul. She did not regard such matters as
subjects for tears. Marriage was a step in life, like any other, and
only deserved more serious consideration because it was final.

This was the woman whose love was to make heart-haven for Austin May;
the serious, sober choice of his manhood, after all his boyish follies
were past. He had told her very seriously and politely of his desire
to marry her, one Sunday evening, on the piazza of a house at Newport.
It was necessary for him to speak in a low tone, as the people of the
house were not far off. She was silent for some seconds, and then he
had kissed her.

But here came in the first really difficult thing to do in the whole
proceeding. Not, indeed, the kissing her. But how was he to tell her
of the countess and Gladys Dehon? And yet he must tell her, if only to
explain the necessary delay in announcing their engagement. He looked
at her in the light that came from the late sunset; how perfectly
of the great world she was! He could not bear to lose her now; she
was just such a wife as he would invent for himself, had she not
existed. She was sitting silently, in a pose that was full of grace and
training; much too finely bred to be blushing because he had kissed
her. No man had ever kissed her before; and yet, when she deemed that
the occasion had come when she could fitly let one do it, she no more
blushed because she had so resolved than she would blush at entering a
ball-room.

Then he pulled himself together, and told her very calmly the history
of his life. She was greatly interested, and listened with attention
and sympathy.

“Of course, you must be there--on August 14th, I mean.”

“And keep my word?”

“That,” said Miss Rutherford, “I must leave to you. You can’t keep your
word with both of them.”

“After all,” said May, hopefully, “they may not come.”

“You surely do not expect them to cross the Atlantic in person to meet
you?”

“Oh, no!” said May. “They won’t do that--but they may write or
telegraph.” But May did not feel sure what Mme. Polacca de Valska might
or might not do.

“At all events,” said she, “I think our engagement had better not come
out until after the 14th of August.” And May felt constrained to admit
that this was best.

“And I do not think that you had better see me until then.”

“What?” cried Austin.

But Miss Rutherford was firm. She would not have him with her every day
unless she could tell people that they were engaged. What was she to
say to the world if, after that 14th of August, he were to be engaged
to Mrs. Dehon, for instance? This she delicately hinted; but, moreover,
she told him she had promised to visit the Larneds, at Pomfret, and
the Charles Mt. Vernons, at Beverly, and to spend three weeks with the
Breezes, at Mount Desert, in August. He could not trail about after
her; and it was only three months, after all. So May had consented,
with an ill grace; and when she left, two days later, he found nothing
better than to join VanKnyper on a yachting cruise. Then he had gone up
on the Restigouche, salmon-fishing; and on the 12th of August he was in
the Maine woods.




II.

THE IDYL OF ANTEROS.


In the leisure of the forest, Austin May reflected--for the first time
comprehensively--upon his conduct of life. It seemed to him that the
only sensible action of many wasted years was his getting engaged to
Georgiana Rutherford; and yet, for the moment, it rather added to his
perplexities. He felt convinced that Tom Leigh would say it put him in
a greater hole than ever. Here was he engaged to three women at once,
and all the engagements matured upon the fourteenth day of August
proximo. Why is it that there is not such a thing as the making an
assignment for the benefit of one’s heart’s creditors? He might then
place himself in the hands of some respectable chaperone as assignee,
and pay each of the contracting parties thirty-three per cent. Or he
might even get a composition, or an extension at long time. Possibly
the other two would assign their claims to Georgiana. If she were
the sole creditor, he fancied that they might effect an arrangement.
She certainly had the only lien on the few remaining assets of his
hard-worked ventricles.

Georgiana Rutherford! What a perfectly civilized creature she was.
How well she would look at the end of the state dining-table in the
Brookline house, with the épergne in front of her. Then how gracefully
she would sweep out, at the head of the procession of ladies--Brookline
ladies, with a guest or two from Boston or Jamaica Plains--and leave
him and his friends to their bachelor-talk and cigars. But first, after
being married, he had promised to take her up the Nile. May had already
been up the Nile.

May slipped off the rock into the rushing river. He had got to
thinking, in the absence of salmon, and forgotten his whereabouts.
It was clumsy of him, he reflected, as his boots queaked soddenly
campward. He was getting heavy, and slow, and middle-aged. And suddenly
he felt a yearning for the wilds, for wilder wilds even than Aroostook
County. He had been now for six years in high civilizations--Japan,
India, England, or, at worst, the States. There were several dreams of
his scheming-time not yet effected. Among others, a trip from Hudson’s
Bay, in canoes, through the Great Slave lake to the Pacific. He was
almost on the ground, with good guides and an outfit; why not start at
once? But there was the fourteenth of August next to come, he reflected.

A strange wagon was in the camp when he got back; a single buckboard
from the nearest settlement, and it bore a pretty girl. May had
conversation with her. A veritable Lady of the Aroostook was she; not
over-idealized, like the heroine of Mr. Howells. Really, she had a
certain rudimentary charm. Suppose, thought May, I were to make her my
dusky bride? For dusky, read freckled.

By Jove, thought May--an idea indeed. If he gave it out as such? If,
in consideration of a trip to Boston, new bonnets, and a junket of
quite Merovingian dimensions, she were to consent to go to Brookline
and personate his bride, for that day only? How natural that he, at
the very end of his eleven years, should have plunged into nature and
married la première venue. It was just the thing, he felt assured his
friends would say, that he was certain to do. Why, even the heroes
of the Lady of Aroostook did as much. And even the Comtesse Polacca
dei Cascadegli de Valska could have nothing to reply to such a living
argument as this Maine girl would present. My wife--Mrs. Austin May.
Gladys Dehon would scorn, but believe. And then, having nobly earned
her reward, his salvatress might retire to her primitive forest decked
with new fal-lals to astound the rustic breast.

But now, confound it, here as always, the cursed conventions rose
in his way. The proprieties were ever his fatality, a very ghost of
Banquo at the feast of life. Why had he been born in Boston? True,
they had once saved him from the countess; but now they were to offer
him a humble sacrifice to her unlovely years. For she came first
chronologically, and she was certain to come first in fact.

May had no further ideas; and he had to leave his river at the height
of the salmon season.

We have told how, on the 14th of August, he arrived at Brookline, true
to his appointment with all three. He got to Boston late in the evening
before, went to his club, passed a sleepless night, and took an early
morning train for Brookline, as we have seen.

And, perhaps, as we have also seen, a much more awkward thing than this
had happened. Austin May was there, ready to meet any one of them. The
period of probation required by the will had elapsed.

But as May travelled up to the city in that hot weather, he had been
wondering to himself which and how many of them he should see, and it
had become very clear to him that he did not feel the least desire to
see any one of the three.

His uncle’s will had well been justified. With shocked shamefacedness
he thought of the countess, that Trouville heroine that he believed
to be little better than an adventuress, a gambler, tracked by the
police. And Mrs. Dehon--well, if Mrs. Dehon were to ride madly up that
quiet Boston lawn, May felt sure that he should flee in terror. And
Georgiana Rutherford--now that it came to the point, and after his
three months’ consideration, May did not feel that he wished to marry
even Georgiana Rutherford.

He gave little thought to his impending doom, still less thought of
escaping it. He was as one who had been released eleven years upon
parole, and must now give himself up to be shot. He even gave himself
little curiosity as to whose the fatal bullet would prove to be. A
man ordered out with a file of soldiers to be executed looks upon the
levelled row of muzzles with an absolute impartiality. He was in the
position of the celebrated d’Artagnan, who, having three duels in
the Pré aux Clercs, and certain of being killed by Athos at 12, gave
himself little anxiety about Porthos, who was to follow at 12.15, or
Aramis, who was only due at 12.30.

But, as the day wore on, and the reaction followed the artificial
strength given by many cigars, his state of mind had approximated to an
abject and unreasoning terror. And in this mood he was, late in the
afternoon, when he turned and saw, stationary before his front door,
that carriage, with its footman in livery.

His one instinct was to conceal himself. Nervously he grabbed the heavy
“Burton’s Anatomy;” the secret door swung open; the fountain in the
lake began to play, and in a score of seconds May was hiding in its
cool and watery depths.




III.

THE UNCERTAIN GLORY OF A NEW YORK GIRL.


When May emerged in the little grass island, screened safely by the
play of falling waters, he was breathless with the run; and his heart
pounded against his ribs with the violence of his emotions. The
countess it unquestionably was. None but she would arrive in open
carriage and pair and splendid livery. And May reckoned he would have
to stay there, in the shelter of the fountain, until the light made
his escape safe and possible. As for seeing her, that was out of the
question. Had he still cared for Mrs. Dehon, he might have choked off
the other one; but he had not pluck for it now. He had mildly hoped
that Gladys and the countess might have arrived at the same time and
settled it between them; but Allah had willed otherwise. It was damp
and uncomfortable upon the little island, however, without even a
cigar; and he did not dare go back to the pavilion.

As he stood peering through the falling water the carriage turned
about, left the house, and came down the driveway. May was astounded.
He tried his best to see who was in it, but the distance was too great.
He fancied that he made out a figure upon the back seat, but it was
that of a young man. He was surely too young for Serge; but, possibly,
Serge had left a son. This, indeed, was extremely probable. And the
son was gone to the gate to await more formal introduction to his
papa-in-law; and had left the countess in the house.

This was the most terrible possibility that had yet occurred to his
fevered imagination, overwrought with suspense and too much tobacco as
it was. For a moment the idea of the buggy and the fast horse in the
stable presented itself as the only certain means of escape. But at the
same instant he saw Fides emerge from the side-door, carrying something
white in his mouth. The hound came to the door of the pavilion and
scratched there; not finding any response, he took to coursing around
the building, in wider and wider distances, until his circle included
the whole pond. When he had once more made the circuit of this, without
getting trail of his master, he lifted his nose from the ground to give
utterance to occasional lugubrious howls.

This was impossible. Something must be done at once, or his chief
retreat would be discovered. May rapidly descended through the
subterranean passage, and appearing at the door of the pavilion,
whistled softly. The dog bounded toward him, and May took the letter
from his mouth. It was accompanied with a card of “Mr. Burlington
Quincy,” as May hurriedly read. Now, Mr. Burlington Quincy bore a name
utterly unknown to Austin May.

He looked at the note. It was certainly not in the handwriting of
Madame Polacca de Valska, and May breathed a sigh of relief. He opened
it.

  “MY DEAR MR. MAY: (it began)

  “I know you will not misinterpret my action, when I write to tell you
  that our engagement cannot be made known to-day. The bearer of this,
  Mr. Burlington Quincy, of Boston, I did not know when our pleasant
  acquaintance began last year, but I feel sure that he is the only man
  I have ever----”

“Loved,” added May to himself, mechanically, as the first page came
to an end. Without troubling himself to read any further, he merely
looked at the signature, which was, “yours ever sincerely, Georgiana
Rutherford.”

“Bah!” said Austin to himself again, and he crumpled up the letter
and threw it upon the pedestal of the Venus of Milo. A very different
sort of girl from Georgy Rutherford, she looked at him with an air of
dignity offended by his flippancy. Certainly a great weight was off
his mind, even if it did leave behind the faintest conceivable smart
of irritation. One, at least, was disposed of satisfactorily, and he
threw himself into the great arm-chair with a sigh of relief. He wished
Miss Rutherford joy of her bargain, though he could not but think it
ill-bred of her to choose the replacing victim as the messenger of his
release. The only man she had ever loved, indeed! And who was Mr.
Burlington Quincy? Well, it mattered little to him.

May looked at his watch; it was seven o’clock. Only five hours more
of this awful day remained! His condition was one of absolute nervous
prostration; and he looked in a glass to see if his hair had yet
turned gray. Could it be that they would none of them appear? He felt
almost hungry, but that eating was out of the question for one in his
position. He could, however, take a biscuit and a glass of claret; and
this he did.

But May was fated that day to have hard luck with his uncle’s wine.
Hardly had he begun to sip the glass, when a loud knocking at the very
door of his pavilion made him drop it, and again seek refuge in his
fountain hiding-place. From there he looked through the jets of water
and saw that the knocker was none other than the faithful Schmidt.

May hastened back again to the pavilion and opened the door.

“What do you mean by this?” said he, angrily. “Did I not tell you not
to come out under any circumstances, unless you heard a pistol-shot?”

But, alas! The effect of the solitude, the heat, and the excitement of
his master’s strange behavior had been too much, even for the perfect
valet. Moreover, he had felt it his duty to finish all his master’s
so precipitately abandoned bottles, lest they should fall into the
hands of the enemy. If Mr. Schmidt was not tipsy, it was clear that
he soon would be. He had been leaning heavily against the door, and
as his master opened it suddenly, he fell into the room, head over
heels to the floor; and there, without getting up, he endeavored to
bow apologetically, and swayed to and fro with the effort, smiling a
meaningless smile and holding a visiting-card in his right hand. May
took it mechanically. It was edged in deep black; and upon it he read
the simple legend:

_Mrs. Terwilliger Dehon_.




IV.

THE KEEPING OF THE TRYST.


May grasped the half-drunken valet by the coat. “And you let her in?”
said he.

“I said, m’sieu’,” gasped out poor Schmidt, “that m’sieu’, was here.”

With a groan of mingled rage and terror, May flew to the door and made
it fast. Then he took Schmidt by his offending coat and shoved, rather
than led, him into the subaqueous passageway. When they emerged upon
the island, May said, with a final shake:

“Now, sir, go and tell all the world that I’m not at home--d’ye hear?
And come back and tell me; and that you may come back sober, I’ll
clear your thick head for you.” And suiting the action to the word,
May hurled poor Schmidt through the cool jets of the fountain; and he
disappeared with a startling plunge in the waters of the ornamental
lake. They were but a few feet deep, however, and Schmidt scrambled to
his feet and went wading through the lily-pads to the shore. And in a
few moments he came back, still wet, but quite sobered, to the brink
nearest the island.

“What does she say?” cried May.

“That she will wait for M’sieur,” came back the answer that May heard;
and he sank upon the rustic seat with a feeling that all was over with
him. Should he still fly? He could not bring himself to break his
word at this late hour. If it could be that the widowed Mrs. Dehon
had come all this distance--unwomanly as it was--he could not leave
her now. Moreover, it was exactly like her. She was just the woman to
take the leap herself, rather than trust herself and her heart-secrets
to written words. And as May pulled himself together and went toward
the house he wished he could have conjured back one spark of that
flame he once felt for her. His crusty old uncle had not foreseen that
thus, by the rash heir’s promise, the wise provisions of his will
could be evaded. What would his wise uncle have done in a similar
situation?--Ordered a monument at Mount Auburn and prepared the
remains for it afterward, perhaps. His head was too cloudy to think.

May reached the doors of the house. It was already dark; and he had one
last moment of hesitation as he pressed his hand upon the carved-oak
door-knob. Then, with a rally of his sense of honor, he turned it and
entered the house.

The great hall was quite dark; and Austin had to feel his way to the
dining-room, into which, as being the only habitable apartment, Schmidt
had had to show the fair Gladys. Here was a single candle burning; and
beyond the remains of what was evidently Schmidt’s dinner, just under
the Copley portrait of the lady in the lilac dress, sat a solitary
figure.

But May started back as he saw it. It certainly was not Gladys. It
was--it was a man; and as it rose and came forward to the candle-light
there appeared unmistakably the red face and pudgy figure of her
elderly husband! For a moment the joyous reaction held May speechless;
but then he sprang forward.

“Mr. Terwilliger Dehon, I am delighted to----”

But Terwilliger waved him back with the gesture of an M.P. quelling an
assembly of constituents; and in his hand he carried a letter. “May
I ask, Mr. May, what is the meaning of this?” And Dehon brought the
offending document close beneath May’s nose, lying upon his chubby
palm; and then slapped it violently with his other hand.

“Of this?” said May, innocently. “What is it?”

“That, sir, is a letter I found among my wife’s effects.” And beyond
all question the letter was in May’s own handwriting. May stared
helplessly at Dehon; and Terwilliger glared fixedly at May. And through
all the embarrassment of the situation loomed up May’s consciousness,
antagonistic as their meeting was, that he was uncommonly glad to see
him.

“Is--is Mrs. Dehon with you?” said May, feebly, as the awful
possibility occurred to him that they had been divorced.

“My beloved wife is in heaven,” said Dehon, pulling out a large
pocket-handkerchief and sinking back into his chair.

“My dear sir,” cried May, grasping both his hands, “I am--unfeignedly
sorry to hear it. When did----”

“That, sir,” cried Terwilliger, furiously, “is no answer to my
question. Did you, or did you not, write this letter?” And he jumped
from his chair and smacked the letter savagely against the dinner-table.

Evasion was impossible. “I am afraid, Mr. Dehon, that I did.” Dehon
fumed.

“And now, my dear sir,” said May, his face unconsciously broadening to
a smile, “will you not stay and dine with me? I have only----”

But at this the peppery old gentleman positively sailed off the floor
in his passion. In vain May told him that he had received nothing from
the late Mrs. Dehon but a long course of snubs; in vain May assured
him that he himself was more delighted than ever Mr. Dehon could be,
that there had never been a possibility of his marrying the lamented
Gladys; it was to no purpose that he besought him to stay and dine. He
tried to sympathize with Terwilliger in his loss, and Terwilliger grew
only the more infuriated. He pointed out to him that his letter had
been entirely contingent, to take effect solely upon Mr. Terwilliger’s
death; but upon this the old gentleman fairly choked with rage.

Finally poor Austin gave it up. He abandoned all effort to pacify him,
and listened submissively to the philippic the indignant Terwilliger
poured forth. And, to use the expressive but inelegant phrase of the
day, he blew himself off right well. Austin sat and listened with a
mind at peace.

A man’s own eloquence is a great relief, and there is no knowing how
far Mr. Dehon would have cooled off in time. It is possible that he
would have ended by staying to dinner. But, just as he was finishing a
most effective exordium, the noise of carriage-wheels was heard outside
upon the gravel.

In two strides May was at the window, had thrown open the sash with
a crash that shivered all the glass, and hurled himself through it
into outer darkness, leaving the astounded Mr. Dehon, one eloquent arm
extended in the air, addressing himself most earnestly to the four
Copley portraits and the two battle-pieces of indigestible fruit.




V.

THE RETURN OF THE COUNTESS.


Beyond all question this was now the Comtesse Polacca de Valska. She
was the only one left. All others were present or accounted for. Again
May gained his pavilion, with the fleetness of an Exmoor deer; it was
quite dark by this time, and he could run about fearlessly. With a
trembling hand he adjusted his dark-lantern, lit the lamp, and fixed
the focus full upon the house-front door.

He was just in time to see a veiled and much beshawled lady assisted
down from the vehicle that stood at the door; and after a word of
colloquy with the driver, she entered the house. May could not see
her face; but it was just the figure, he fancied, of the Countess de
Valska. The carriage drove away, the front door closed, and all again
was silent, save the thumping of poor Austin’s strained and shaken
heart. Great heavens! he complained to the harmless Venus of Milo. The
worst had been realized indeed.

This time there was no indecision. The only safety lay in flight. When
it came to the point of marrying the de Valska, he would be damned if
he would. No sooner had he gained this conclusion than he sought to put
it in practice. With quick and stealthy steps he gained the stable.
A drive of fifteen miles to Framingham would put him on the New York
train; and the Umbria sailed on the morrow. Little difficulties with
countesses were better understood on European shores.

But alas! it was only to find that the stable-door was locked. He could
hear inside the noises of a restless horse, but both fast horse and
buggy were beyond his reach. The over-cautious Schmidt had locked them
in, and taken the key. May’s heart sank. He looked around for an axe,
a log, anything to batter down the door with--he would have set fire
to his own stable if necessary; then a brilliant thought occurred to
him--of the pistol-shot that was to be the signal to Schmidt in cases
of emergency.

He ran back to the pavilion. As he passed the house he thought he heard
sounds of angry collocation in the entry. But this was no time for idle
curiosity; and he ran on to the pavilion, grasped the revolver, ran
back before the house, placed himself in the little clump of pines, and
fired. The noises in the house ceased. He fired again.

The second report of his revolver was followed by a wild and shrill
screaming in the house. A second after, the front door was violently
flung open, and Mr. Terwilliger Dehon burst forth with the celerity of
a pellet from a pop-gun. He was immediately and closely pursued by a
female figure, screaming violently. After her, all in the focus of the
dark-lantern, appeared a gaunt and stooping individual with a shot-gun,
which he brought to his shoulder and incontinently fired, aiming, as
far as May could judge, at the North Star. Then he threw away the
shot-gun and joined in the pursuit; and after him came the faithful
Schmidt, in obedience to his master’s signal, once more unperturbed.

“What has happened?” cried May, rushing forward. “Where is she?”

But even as he spoke, feminine arms were thrown around his neck, a
fainting feminine figure hung about his shoulder, and feminine lips
whispered in his ear:

“At last!”

With a gasp of despair, May disengaged her and led her to the
front door, where he deposited his precious burden upon the china
garden-seat. The countess seemed less graceful than of yore, and she
certainty was heavier. But the countess, of course it was.

“Sech a time, Mr. May,” said she. “Me a-comin’ up with the dépôt-man,
and findin’ a burglar in the house; an’ the volleys from the ambushes
as was outside; an’ Mr. Eastman a-runnin’ for his gun, an’ I chasin’
the burglar; an’ all along of that furriner in the kitchen as left the
cellar-door wide open; an’, says I----”

“Mrs. Eastman!” cried May, with a sigh of relief, as if he saw the dawn
again. But that heroine’s short-lived valor was exhausted. To chase an
elderly burglar out one’s own front door, amid salvoes of musketry, was
surely excuse enough for leaning on the shoulder of the first reliable
male one met and knew; but the thought of both actions was too much
for feminine nerves, and Mrs. Eastman proceeded to get up the best
notion of hysterics her Maine training could produce. As for May, he
was so glad that it was not the Polacca de Valska that he could have
kissed even the elderly housekeeper; but he thought better of it, and
consigned her to the tender soothing of her husband.

“Mirandy,” he heard Mr. Eastman say, “don’t ye be a fool!”




Scene Fifth

THE RESIDUARY BEQUEST




I.

THE ORDER OF DISCHARGE.


May went back again to his pavilion. Great heavens, what a day! He
looked at his watch. It was already after ten o’clock; and his heart
gave a leap of joy. Could it be that the countess would never turn up
at all?

He was too much shaken by the excitements of the day to sit still
quietly, and count the minutes; so he took to wandering in the driveway
about the lake. He was conscious of a marvellous accession of spirits!
Poor Mr. Terwilliger Dehon! And May laughed to himself as he pictured
their meeting, and the Eastmans taking him for a burglar. What could
she have done to drive Dehon in such terror from the house? May
wondered what had become of him, and looked with some apprehension lest
he should have rushed into the lily-pond. But that was impossible in
so light a night. Moreover, he could have waded out. Well, well! he
never should have known how to get rid of him. Peace to his widower’s
weeds.

The harvest moon had risen, and shone brightly on the familiar fields.
Beauty is only relished by the free. How strong and sweet is our memory
for places! Each swell of grassy hill seemed like an old playmate; the
very contour of the masses of elm-foliage, darkly outlined under the
moon, seemed all familiar to him. Every time that May walked by the
main gate-way, with the iron cannon-balls, he looked nervously through
it; but the white, shady road was clean and empty, and the night was
still.

His fortune was almost too great to be believed in, and he looked
frequently at his watch, and listened timidly for every sound. Had the
countess forgotten him? Had she captured another? Well, Gladys was
dead, and Georgiana “was married;” and he sat there, “dipping his nose
in the Gascon wine”--still seven years short of “forty year.”

But the night waxed and the moon rose higher, and the white mists began
to drift in, stilly, from the distant river; and there was yet no
manifestation of the Countess Polacca de Valska.

And at last the village church rang out twelve bells; and the
cocks crew; and May pitched his cigar into the lake with a sigh
that resembled a benediction. The day was over. That most terrible
twenty-four hours of his life was safely passed. He could go to bed and
sleep serenely, in the consciousness that no one of his idle old dreams
was to be realized, that no folly of his past was to assume shape and
confront him now. And all his arsenal of weapons, his laboratory of
drugs, his store-house of Dutch courage, had proved unnecessary.

He walked along by the margent of the little lake; and as he did so,
a thought struck him. He entered the pavilion and set the fountain
playing, in celebration of his deliverance. He threw open all the
shutters and the wide door--useless precautions now--and the flood of
moonlight streamed again into the familiar old hall. He looked about
at the misanthropic pictures, and the moonlight fell fair upon the
beautiful Venus of Milo in the corner. He looked again at the old
will, and Georgiana Rutherford’s note, and Mrs. Dehon’s visiting-card
lying beside it. Through such various fortunes had he tended into
Latium.

He patted Fides on his massive head, as the dog walked along beside
him. He went back into the house. It was all his own now; all his own,
and untrammelled. He called his valet to him.

“Schmidt,” said he, “I am not going to sit up any longer. If anyone
comes, I have been here and gone--you understand? I have gone--to
Arizona.” Schmidt bowed. He had regained his imperturbability, and was
fearful of being discharged. An American servant would have left, and
brought an action for his ducking; not so the obsequious Oriental. And
Austin May took his candle and went quietly to bed. He had kept his
tryst honorably; he had made due tender of himself; and by all laws,
human and divine, his three offers of marriage had now expired.




II.

A PRIOR MORTGAGE.


Our hero sank comfortably into the great old-fashioned bed, with a sigh
of relief that he could sleep at last in peace. The broad windows were
opened, and the moonlight lay across the lawn; and from it came the
speech of insects, and of summer birds; far off, one whip-poor-will.

If anyone ever deserved sleep, he thought that he did; but this is not
a world where we get our deserts. All night long he lay awake. His mind
would go from his infatuation with the de Valska to his passion for
poor Gladys Dehon; from the Exmoor hounds to his engagement with Miss
Rutherford. He was devoutly thankful that he had escaped them all, and
yet the peace he had expected did not come. He heard the familiar old
church-bell strike two, and three, and four, as he had heard it in his
boyhood, when wakeful for a fishing-excursion, or for some country
ride. What was he to do next?

He could not analyze his state of mind. The night hours passed, and
still he lay there wondering. The whip-poor-will had some time been
silent; suddenly, as if at a wave of an unseen baton, the orchestra of
day birds fell to singing. May listened; in eleven years he had not
heard them. Then, as suddenly, they stopped. And then the dawn came,
one ray of orange sunlight, and the fragrance of the new-born day.

At last he rose, impatiently, and went to the wide window. The sunbeams
slid beneath the arching elms and slanted through the sward. Such
scenes had been wont to make him happy when he was young--and when
he was in love. This was a strange mood for him at thirty-three and
free--a mood of melancholy, almost a loneliness.

Even his cold bath failed to restore him. He was glad they had none of
them come; he was certain of that. And yet----

As he was dressing, he opened the closet door. There was the broad
straw hat, with its pink ribbons, still hanging, faded, on the nail;
and suddenly he recognized it. He took it down, and looked at it
curiously; and as he sat there, holding it in his hands, the great St.
Bernard dog came up and sniffed at it. It was May Austin’s. And as
Austin sat there, he remembered that he had loved her.

He walked out upon the lawn again, brushing the dews upon the grass.
Fool that he was! First loves were best, after all.

But where was she? He had not heard from her for years. He had never
even written, after the Trouville episode. And she--she must have
divined that he was false. First loves were best. Oh, cruel Uncle
Austin! Yet his own wretched fickleness was the most to blame, after
all. His uncle was a cynic; but he had been a young man in love.

Of one thing he was sure--though he had taken eleven years to find it
out. Wherever she might be, throughout the world, there he would find
her. And he knew now what had been in his mind, that yesterday, when
he had walked beside the lily-pond, along the soft path no longer trod
by her. Where could she be? First loves were best. And he fell into a
reverie.

He was still holding the hat in his hand, and Fides came up again and
sniffed at it. There was something in his mouth--was it a glove?

May took the glove, and almost thought he recognized it. It was a
woman’s glove, a garden-glove with a long arm--where had he found it?

The dog looked up at him, almost as if he read his thoughts, and then
he led the way and Austin followed. He went across the lawn, and
through the hedge, to the well-remembered seat in the orchard, by the
linden-tree, and there he stopped. And May sat down upon the seat and
dreamed.

An hour he sat there, and then he saw a figure coming through the
field. And his heart told him that this was May Austin. She did not see
him, and he waited there.

When she came out from under the last apple-tree, he saw her stop and
waver. She was lovelier still than he remembered her, and he went up to
her and took her hand. She blushed, and he could feel it tremble as it
lay in his.

“I--I thought you were abroad,” said she.

“I have come back,” he answered, simply.




III.

THE POSTHUMOUS JEST.


An hour later Schmidt was sitting by the front door, smoking his long
pipe, when he thought he saw his master crossing the lawn along the
lily-pond. But he was walking hand in hand with a young lady. The long
pipe dropped from Schmidt’s hand; and

“Potztausend!”

The imperturbable valet was moved to say as much as this, but of
further speech remained incapable. May approached.

“Schmidt, you will go to town and get the rest of my luggage.”

The valet only stared.

“And after this I shall not need your services. I will find you a good
place (with some of my bachelor friends,” thought May; “poor devils!”).
Schmidt still stood there, his broken pipe upon the door-step.

“Do you hear what I say?”

Schmidt made an effort. “There is a letter for monsieur--in the
pavilion.” A letter! May trembled to himself once more.

“I must go home,” said May Austin, still blushing violently. She lived
in a cottage there, near by, that she had bought with her slender
fortune. But May begged her to wait until he had gone to the pavilion,
and then he would go with her. He feared that he knew what the letter
was. But it had come too late! A thousand countesses could not bind him
now.

Coming thither, May sat upon the door-step, and Austin opened the
letter.

                                          LAW OFFICES OF VESEY & BEAMES,
                                           3 COURT STREET, BOSTON,
                                                        August 14, 1886.

  AUSTIN MAY, Esq., Brookline, Mass.

  DEAR SIR: The eleven years’ delay required by the will of your late
  uncle, John Austin, having expired to-day, I have much satisfaction
  in sending you a copy (herein enclosed) of the document contained in
  the sealed envelope referred to in said will, and constituting his
  residuary legatee; although, as I am informed that you have never
  married, the residuary clause of the will does not take effect.
  The executors hold themselves in readiness to deliver over to you
  all the securities and title-deeds representing your uncle’s estate
  upon receiving from you an affidavit that you have not, up to date,
  contracted a legal marriage.

  I have some embarrassment in speaking to you of another aspect of
  this case, and can only hope you will think I acted for the best.
  You will remember that immediately after your uncle’s death, I sent
  you a copy of the will as it was filed for probate. But when it came
  to a hearing I found that the court utterly refused to allow probate
  of a will which contained as a most important part the contents of
  a sealed letter, left in my custody, and the purport of which was
  unknown to the court. His honor intimated that he considered the
  will ridiculous in tenor and inartificial in structure; and that it
  was at least questionable whether the residuary devise was not void,
  as dependent upon a condition in restraint of marriage. It was in
  vain that I cited the case where a man chalked his will upon his
  own barn-door, and the barn-door having been brought into court and
  copied was allowed to be replaced upon its hinges. The court wholly
  objected to being made, as it were, a confidant of Mr. Austin’s love
  projects; and insisted that the sealed letter should be opened then
  and there, and read to the court, and appended to the will and filed
  away with it. Accordingly this was done.

  But I conceived that I should be best following out the wishes of
  your uncle and my old friend by not telling you of this. Suspecting
  that it would never occur to you to inspect the court records, the
  reporters were paid for their silence, and although you might at any
  time during the past eleven years have read this sealed envelope,
  your continued absence abroad leads me to hope that you have never
  done so.

  I am, sir, with great respect,
                                         Faithfully yours,
                                                           J. VESEY, JR.

Austin May dropped the letter from his hands and looked at May. “I
might have known it any time these eleven years,” said he.

“Known what?” said she, picking up the enclosure, which had fluttered
to the floor.

“Perhaps it is as well,” gasped Austin; and he shuddered as he thought
of Mrs. Terwilliger and the scheming Countess. He took the paper from
May’s hands and read as follows:

“I, John Austin, gentleman, hereby incorporate this sealed writing,
referred to in my will of even date herewith, as part of my said will.
Having provided in such my will that in the event of my said nephew,
Austin May, becoming married before he attain the age of thirty-five,
or before the period of eleven years shall have elapsed from the date
of my death, whichever shall first happen, all my property, real
and personal, except my said bin of Lafite claret, shall go to my
residuary legatee; and having observed a certain tenderness existing
between my said nephew, Austin May, and my said niece, May Austin,
I hereby nominate and create my dear niece, May Austin, as such my
residuary legatee--in the hope that as I, marrying without love, have
been unhappy, they, my said niece and nephew, marrying for love alone,
giving up all thoughts of worldly advantage, may enjoy the blessings of
this world besides.”

The paper slipped from Austin’s hands.

“To think that I have waited eleven years!” said he. And he struck his
hand against his forehead.

But May Austin looked up to him and smiled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the Countess Polacca de Valska, Austin never heard. Terwilliger
Dehon remarried, and, for the second time, a very pretty woman; such
men always do. The Burlington Quincys have also been married; and Tom
Leigh has come to stay at Brookline for this season; and Mrs. Eastman’s
reign is ended; but Fides is an honored inmate of the Brookline house.
And if you drive by there, some summer afternoon, you will note once
more about the windows those frilled and pleated things that denote the
presence of a woman’s hand.


THE END.




  BRIEF LIST OF BOOKS OF FICTION PUBLISHED BY CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS,
    743-745 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.


_Mary Adams._

  AN HONORABLE SURRENDER. (16mo, $1.00.)

  “The story belongs distinctly to the realistic school of modern
  fiction. The situations are those of every day. The characters are
  not in the least eccentric; the dialogue is never extravagant; the
  descriptive and analytical passages are neither obtrusive nor too
  prolix. The sum of all these negations is a charming book, full of a
  genuine human interest.”--_The Portland Advertiser._


_William Waldorf Astor._

  VALENTINO: An Historical Romance. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “It is well called a romance, and no romance indeed could be more
  effective than the extraordinary extract from Italian annals of the
  16th Century which it preserves in such vivid colors. The incidents
  are presented with dramatic art. The movement of the story never
  drags.”--_The New York Tribune._


_Arlo Bates._

  A WHEEL OF FIRE. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “The novel deals with character rather than incident, and is evolved
  from one of the most terrible of moral problems with a subtlety not
  unlike that of Hawthorne. One cannot enumerate all the fine points
  of artistic skill which make this study so wonderful in its insight,
  so rare in its combination of dramatic power and tenderness.”--_The
  Critic._


_Hjalmar H. Boyesen._

  FALCONBERG. Illustrated (12mo, $1.50)--GUNNAR. (Sq. 12mo,
    $1.25)--TALES FROM TWO HEMISPHERES. (Sq. 12mo, $1.00)--ILKA ON THE
    HILL TOP, and Other Stories. (Sq. 12mo, $1.00)--QUEEN TITANIA (Sq.
    12mo, $1.00).

  “Mr. Boyesen’s stories possess a sweetness, a tenderness, and a
  drollery that are fascinating, and yet they are no more attractive
  than they are strong.”--_The Home Journal._


_H. C. Bunner._

  THE STORY OF A NEW YORK HOUSE. Illustrated by A. B. Frost (12mo,
    $1.25)--THE MIDGE. (12mo, $1.00)--IN PARTNERSHIP. With Brander
    Matthews (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00).

  “It is Mr. Bunner’s delicacy of touch and appreciation of what is
  literary art that give his writings distinctive quality. Everything
  Mr. Bunner paints shows the happy appreciation of an author who has
  not alone mental discernment, but the artistic appreciation. The
  author and the artist both supplement one another in this excellent
  ‘Story of a New York House.’”--_The New York Times._


_Frances Hodgson Burnett._

  THAT LASS O’ LOWRIE’S. Illustrated (paper, 50 cents; cloth,
    $1.25)--HAWORTH’S. Illustrated (12mo, $1.25)--THROUGH ONE
    ADMINISTRATION. (12mo, $1.50)--LOUISIANA. (12mo, $1.25)--A FAIR
    BARBARIAN. (12mo, $1.25)--SURLY TIM, and Other Stories (12mo,
    $1.25).

  _The above 6 vols., in uniform binding, $7.50 per set._

  LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY. Illustrated by R. B. Birch (Sq. 8vo,
    $2.00)--SARA CREWE; or, What Happened at Miss Minchin’s. Illustrated
    by R. B. Birch (Sq. 8vo, $1.00).

  _Earlier Stories by the same author, each 16mo, paper covers._

  LINDSAY’S LUCK (30 cts.)--PRETTY POLLY PEMBERTON (40 cts.)--KATHLEEN
    (40 cts.)--THEO (30 cts.)--MISS CRESPIGNY (30 cts.).

  “Mrs. Burnett discovers gracious secrets in rough and forbidding
  natures--the sweetness that often underlies their bitterness--the soul
  of goodness in things evil. She seems to have an intuitive perception
  of character. If we apprehend her personages, and I think we do
  clearly, it is not because she describes them to us, but because they
  reveal themselves in their actions. Mrs. Burnett’s characters are as
  veritable as Thackeray’s.”--RICHARD HENRY STODDARD.


_William Allen Butler._

  DOMESTICUS. A Tale of the Imperial City (12mo, $1.25.).

  “Under a veil made intentionally transparent, the author maintains a
  running fire of good-natured hits at contemporary social follies.
  There is a delicate love story running through the book. The author’s
  style is highly finished. One might term it old-fashioned in its
  exquisite choiceness and precision.”--_The New York Journal of
  Commerce._


_George W. Cable._

  THE GRANDISSIMES. (12mo, $1.25)--OLD CREOLE DAYS. (12mo, cloth,
    $1.25; also in two parts, 16mo, cloth, each, 75 cts.; paper, each,
    30 cts.)--DR. SEVIER. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.25)--
    BONAVENTURE. A Prose Pastoral of Acadian Louisiana (12mo, $1.25).

  _The set, 4 vols., $5.00._

  “There are few living American writers who can reproduce for us more
  perfectly than Mr. Cable does, in his best moments, the speech, the
  manners, the whole social atmosphere of a remote time and a peculiar
  people. A delicious flavor of humor penetrates his stories, and the
  tragic portions are handled with rare strength.”--_The New York
  Tribune._


_Mary Mapes Dodge._

  THEOPHILUS AND OTHERS. (12mo, $1.50.)

  “Mrs. Dodge has a marked gift of being constantly entertaining. There
  is a certain spiciness and piquancy of flavor in her work which
  makes even the slightest things that come from her pen pleasant and
  profitable reading.”--_The New York Evening Post._


_Edward Eggleston._

  ROXY. Illustrated (12mo, $1.50)--THE CIRCUIT RIDER. Illustrated
    (12mo, $1.50)--THE HOOSIER SCHOOLMASTER. Illustrated (12mo,
    $1.25)--THE MYSTERY OF METROPOLISVILLE. Illustrated (12mo,
    $1.50)--THE END OF THE WORLD. Illustrated (12mo, $1.50).

  _The set, 5 vols., $7.25._

  “Dr. Eggleston’s career as a novelist has been a peculiar one. His
  first work achieved a swift and unmistakable success. Its fresh and
  vivid portraiture of a phase of life and manners, hitherto almost
  unrepresented in literature; its boldly contrasted characters; its
  unconventional, hearty, religious spirit, and its reflection of
  the vigorous individuality of the author, took hold of the public
  imagination.”--_The Christian Union._


_Erckmann-Chatrian._

  FRIEND FRITZ--THE CONSCRIPT. Illustrated--WATERLOO. Illustrated
    (Sequel to The Conscript)--MADAME THERESE--THE BLOCKADE OF
    PHALSBURG. Illustrated--THE INVASION OF FRANCE IN 1814.
    Illustrated--A MILLER’S STORY OF THE WAR. Illustrated.

  _Each, 12mo, $1.25._

  “Not only are these stories interesting historically, but
  intrinsically they present pleasant, well-constructed plots, serving
  in each case to connect the great events which they so graphically
  treat.”--_The Philadelphia Inquirer._


_Harold Frederic._

  SETH’S BROTHER’S WIFE. (12mo, $1.25.)

  “A novel that stands out in clear relief against the fiction of the
  time. It is made of tangible stuff, is serious without being heavy,
  brisk and interesting without being flippant; takes hold of real
  life with an easy yet firm and confident grasp that denotes judicial
  habits of thought as well as a comfortable mastery of the literary
  medium.”--_The Brooklyn Times._


_Robert Grant._

  FACE TO FACE. (12mo, paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.25.)

  “This is a well-told story, the interest of which turns upon a game of
  cross purposes between an accomplished English girl, posing as a free
  and easy American Daisy Miller, and an American gentleman, somewhat
  given to aping the manners of the English.”--_The Buffalo Express._


_Edward Everett Hale._

  PHILIP NOLAN’S FRIENDS. Illustrated (12mo, $1.75).

  “There is no question, we think, that this is Mr. Hale’s completest
  and best novel. The characters are for the most part well drawn, and
  several of them are admirable.”--_The Atlantic Monthly._


_Marion Harland._

  JUDITH: A Chronicle of Old Virginia. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth,
    $1.00)--HANDICAPPED (12mo, $1.50).

  “Fiction has afforded no more charming glimpses of old Virginia life
  than are found in this delightful story, with its quaint pictures, its
  admirably drawn characters, its wit, and its frankness.”--_The
  Brooklyn Daily Times._


_Joel Chandler Harris._

  FREE JOE, and Other Georgian Sketches. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “The author’s skill as a story writer has never been more felicitously
  illustrated than in this volume. The title story is meagre almost to
  baldness in incident, but its quaint humor, its simple but broadly
  outlined characters, and, above all, its touching pathos, combine to
  make it a masterpiece of its kind.”--_The New York Sun._


_Augustus Allen Hayes._

  THE JESUIT’S RING. A Romance of Mount Desert (12mo, paper, 50 cts.;
    cloth, $1.00).

  “The conception of the story is excellent. It indicates a scholarly
  research, a sensitiveness to artistic literary effect, and a fine
  power of selection in material.”--_The Boston Traveller._


_E. T. W. Hoffmann._

  WEIRD TALES. With Portrait (12mo, 2 vols., $3.00).

  “Hoffmann knew how to construct a ghost story quite as skilfully
  as Poe, and with a good deal more sense of reality. All those who
  are in search of a genuine literary sensation, or who care for the
  marvelous and supernatural, will find these two volumes fascinating
  reading.”--_The Christian Union._


_Dr. J. G. Holland._

  SEVEN OAKS--THE BAY PATH--ARTHUR BONNICASTLE--MISS GILBERT’S
    CAREER--NICHOLAS MINTURN.

  _Each, 12mo, $1.25; the set, $6.25._

  “Dr. Holland will always find a congenial audience in the homes of
  culture and refinement. He does not affect the play of the darker and
  fiercer passions, but delights in the sweet images that cluster around
  the domestic hearth. He cherishes a strong fellow-feeling with the
  pure and tranquil life in the modest social circles of the American
  people, and has thus won his way to the companionship of many friendly
  hearts.”--_The New York Tribune._


_Thomas A. Janvier._

  COLOR STUDIES. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “Piquant, novel, and ingenious, these little stories, with all their
  simplicity, have excited a wide interest. The best of them, ‘Jaune
  D’Antimoine,’ is a little wonder in its dramatic effect, its ingenious
  construction.”--_The Critic._


_Virginia W. Johnson._

  THE FAINALLS OF TIPTON. (12mo, $1.25.)

  “The plot is good, and in its working-out original. Character drawing
  is Miss Johnson’s recognized _forte_, and her pen-sketches of the
  inventor, the checker-playing clergyman and druggist, the rising young
  doctor, the sentimental painter, the rival grocers, etc., are quite up
  to her best work.”--_The Boston Commonwealth._


_Lieut. J. D. J. Kelley._

  A DESPERATE CHANCE. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00.)

  “This novel is of the good old-fashioned, exciting kind. Though it
  is a sea story, all the action is not on board ship. There is a
  well-developed mystery, and while it is in no sense sensational,
  readers may be assured that they will not be tired out by analytical
  descriptions, nor will they find a dull page from first to
  last.”--_The Brooklyn Union._


_The King’s Men_:

  A TALE OF TO-MORROW. By Robert Grant. John Boyle O’Reilly. J. S., of
    Dale, and John T. Wheelwright. (12mo, $1.25.)


_Andrew Lang._

  THE MARK OF CAIN. (12mo, paper, 25 cts.; cloth, 75 cts.)

  “No one can deny that it is crammed as full of incident as it will
  hold, or that the elaborate plot is worked out with most ingenious
  perspicuity.”--_The Saturday Review._


_George P. Lathrop._

  NEWPORT. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.25)--AN ECHO OF PASSION.
    (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00)--IN THE DISTANCE. (12mo, paper,
    50 cts.; cloth, $1.00.)

  “It is one of the charms of Mr. Lathrop’s style that it appeals to the
  imagination of the reader by a delicate suggestiveness, which lies
  like a fine atmosphere over the landscape of the story. His novels
  have the refinement of motive which characterize the analytical
  school, but his manner is far more direct and dramatic.”--_The
  Christian Union._


_Brander Matthews._

  THE SECRET OF THE SEA, and Other Stories. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.;
    cloth, $1.00)--THE LAST MEETING. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth,
    $1.00)--IN PARTNERSHIP. With H. C. Bunner (12mo, paper, 50 cts.;
    cloth, $1.00).

  “Mr. Matthews is a man of wide observation and of much familiarity
  with the world. His literary style is bright and crisp, with a
  peculiar sparkle about it--wit and humor judiciously mingled--which
  renders his pages more than ordinarily interesting.”--_The Rochester
  Post-Express._


_Donald G. Mitchell._

  DR. JOHNS. (12mo, $1.25.)

  “The author finds scenes and characters enough in a single parish to
  furnish the staple of the book. There are capital descriptions of
  parish life, home scenes, love-making, hard cases, and saintly men and
  women, their ways, habits; in short, all the warp and woof going to
  make the texture of this isolated rural life. There are few writers in
  this country who have ever surpassed the author in the description of
  rural New England life.”--_The San Francisco Bulletin._


_Fitz-James O’Brien._

  THE DIAMOND LENS, with Other Stories. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth,
    $1.00.)

  “These stories are the only things in literature to be compared with
  Poe’s works, and if they do not equal it in workmanship, they
  certainly do not yield to it in originality.”--_The Philadelphia
  Record._


_Thomas Nelson Page._

  IN OLE VIRGINIA--MARSE CHAN, and Other Stories. (12mo, $1.25.)

  “There are qualities in these stories of Mr. Page which we do not find
  in those of any other Southern author, or not to the same extent and
  in the same force--and they are the qualities which are too often
  wanting in modern literature.”--_N. Y. Mail and Express._


_Howard Pyle._

  WITHIN THE CAPES. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “Simplicity, earnestness, and directness are the appropriate qualities
  of a tale supposed to be reeled by an old sea captain as he sits by
  the chimney corner, stranded in a happy old age. The yarn proves to
  possess all the wonderful elements of romance and adventure.”--_The
  Boston Journal._


_Saxe Holm’s Stories._

  FIRST SERIES.--Draxy Miller’s Dowry--The Elder’s Wife--Whose Wife Was
    She?--The One-Legged Dancers--How One Woman Kept Her Husband--Esther
    Wynn’s Love Letters.

  SECOND SERIES.--Four-Leaved Clover--Farmer Bassett’s Romance--My
    Tourmalene--Joe Hale’s Red Stocking--Susan Lawton’s Escape.

  _Each, 12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00._

  “Saxe Holm’s’ characters are strongly drawn, and she goes right to the
  heart of human experience as one who knows the way. We heartily
  commend them as vigorous, wholesome, and sufficiently exciting
  stories.”--_The Advance._


_Julia Schayer._

  TIGER LILY, and Other Stories. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “Each of the fine short stories in the present collection is original
  in subject and unique in treatment, and the story of ‘Tiger Lily’ is,
  in its way, short as it is, a masterpiece.”--_The Critic._


_Robert Louis Stevenson._

  STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE. (12mo, paper, 25 cts.;
    cloth, $1.00)--KIDNAPPED. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00,
    illustrated, $1.25)--THE MERRY MEN, and Other Tales and Fables.
    (12mo, paper, 35 cts.; cloth, $1.00)--NEW ARABIAN NIGHTS. (12mo,
    paper, 30 cts.; cloth, $1.00)--THE DYNAMITER. With Mrs. Stevenson
    (12mo, paper, 30 cts.; cloth, $1.00).

  “If there is any writer of the time about whom the critics of England
  and America substantially agree it is Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson.
  There is something in his work, precisely what, it is not easy to say,
  which engages and fixes the attention from the first page to the last,
  which shapes itself before the mind’s eye while reading, and which
  refuses to be forgotten long after the book which revealed it has been
  closed and put away.”--_The New York Mail and Express._


_J. S., of Dale._

  GUERNDALE. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.25)--THE CRIME OF HENRY
    VANE. (12mo, $1.00)--THE SENTIMENTAL CALENDAR. Head Pieces by F. G.
    Attwood (12mo, $2.00).

  “The author of that very bright, witty, and audacious story,
  ‘Guerndale,’ has written another, ‘The Crime of Henry Vane,’ which is
  just as witty in many of its chapters and has more of a ‘purpose’ in
  its whole structure. No young novelist in this country seems better
  equipped than Mr. Stimson is. He shows unusual gifts in this and in
  his other stories.”--_The Philadelphia Bulletin._


_Frank R. Stockton._

  RUDDER GRANGE. (12mo, paper, 60 cts.; cloth, $1.25; illustrated by A.
    B. Frost. Sq. 12mo, $2.00)--THE LATE MRS. NULL. (12mo, $1.25)--THE
    LADY. OR THE TIGER? and Other Stories. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth,
    $1.25)--THE CHRISTMAS WRECK, and Other Stories. (12mo, paper, 50
    cts.; cloth, $1.25)--THE BEE-MAN OF ORN, and Other Fanciful Tales.
    (12mo, cloth, $1.25.)

  “Of Mr. Stockton’s stories what is there to say, but that they are an
  unmixed blessing and delight? He is surely one of the most inventive
  of talents, discovering not only a new kind in humor and fancy,
  but accumulating an inexhaustible wealth of details in each fresh
  achievement, the least of which would be riches from another
  hand.”--W. D. HOWELLS, _in Harper’s Magazine_.


_Stories by American Authors._

  _Cloth, 16mo, 50c. each; set, 10 vols., $5.00; cabinet ed., in sets
    only, $7.50. Circulars describing the series sent on application to
    the publishers._

  “The public ought to appreciate the value of this series, which is
  preserving permanently in American literature short stories that
  have contributed to its advancement. American writers lead all
  others in this form of fiction, and their best work appears in these
  volumes.”--_The Boston Globe._


_T. R. Sullivan._

  ROSES OF SHADOW. (12mo, $1.00.)

  “The characters of the story have a remarkable vividness and
  individuality--every one of them--which mark at once Mr. Sullivan’s
  strongest promise as a novelist. All of his men are excellent. John
  Musgrove, the grimly pathetic old beau, sometimes reminds us of a
  touch of Thackeray.”--_The Cincinnati Times-Star._


_John T. Wheelwright._

  A CHILD OF THE CENTURY. (12mo, paper, 50 cts.; cloth, $1.00.)

  “This is one of the most thoroughly enjoyable novels that has been
  published for a long time. It is a story of to-day, of American life
  and character; a typical story of political and social life, free from
  cynicism or morbid realism, and brimming over with good-natured fun,
  which is never vulgar.”--_The Christian at Work._




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RESIDUARY LEGATEE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
